sanders no . i am very proud to be jewish , and being jewish is so much of what i am . look , my father's family was wiped out by hitler in the holocaust . i know about what crazy and radical , and extremist politics mean . i learned that lesson as a tiny , tiny child when my mother would take me shopping , and we would see people working in stores who had numbers on their arms because they were in hitler's concentration camp . i am very proud of being jewish , and that is an essential part of who i am as a human being . 
clinton well , that just wasn't that just wasn't the fact , senator . the fact is that there was a great effort made by the obama administration and others to really send a clear message , because we knew that so many of these children were being abused , being treated terribly while they tried to get to our border . so we have a disagreement on this . i think now what i've called for is counsel for every child so that no child has to face any kind of process without someone who speaks and advocates for that child so that the right decision hopefully can be made . 
chafee thank you , anderson . thank you , cnn . and thank you , facebook , for sponsoring this debate . america has many challenges confronting us ending the perpetual wars , addressing climate change , addressing income inequality , funding education , funding infrastructure , funding healthcare , helping black americans , helping native americans . we have many challenges . who is best able to confront these challenges ? i've served in government at many levels . i know what it's like to solve problems at the local level because i did it as mayor . i know how to get legislation passed through congress because i did it as a senator . i know how to turn around a state because i did as governor of rhode island . but what i'm most proud of is that in 30 years of public service , i have had no scandals . i have high ethical standards . and what i'm most proud of is my judgment , particularly in the iraq war vote . there was a lot of pressure political pressure , public pressure . but i did my homework and i did not believe that the evidence was there that saddam hussein had weapons of mass destruction . and we live now with the consequences . so that kind of judgment is what we want in a president going forward . and i'm running for president to end the wars . i want to be the peacemaker . i am a proven peacemaker . please go to chafee 2016 to learn more about me . thank you . 
sanders . . . let us talk about issues . 
clinton thank you , bernie . thank you . 
sanders i think what we've got to do is move as aggressively as we can to normalize relations with iran . understanding that iran's behavior in so many ways is something that we disagree with ; their support terrorism , the anti american rhetoric that we're hearing from of their leadership is something that is not acceptable . on the other hand , the fact that we've managed to reach an agreement , something that i've very strongly supported that prevents iran from getting a nuclear weapon and we did that without going to war . and that i believe we're seeing a fall in our relationships with iran is a very positive step . so if your question is , do i want to see that relationship become more positive in the future ? yes . can i tell that we should open an embassy in tehran tomorrow ? no , i don't think we should . but i think the goal has go to be as we've done with cuba , to move in warm relations with a very powerful and important country in this world . 
sanders well , that's not true . laughter 
clinton . . . and that's what you and others can start providing in the senate . 
clinton well , look , i think that she's been saying that for as long as i've known her , which is about 25 years . but it doesn't change my view that we need to empower everyone , women and men , to make the best decisions in their minds that they can make . that's what i've always stood for . and when it comes to the issues that are really on the front lines as to whether we're going to have equal pay , paid family leave , some opportunity for , you know , women to go as far as their hard work and talent take them , i think that we still have some barriers to knock down , which is why that's at the core of my campaign . i would note , just for a historic aside , somebody told me earlier today we've had like 200 presidential primary debates , and this is the first time there have been a majority of women on the stage . so , you know , we'll take our progress wherever we can find it . 
clinton well nikki , it's a very fair question . your government at all levels have let you and your children and the people of flint down . so i think that there are there several things . all the repair work that is being done and mayor weaver program that we support to begin to help train people in flint to be able to do this work to distribute the water . everything that is done has to be triple checked to regain your trust and to hold those who are responsible for fixing the pipes and delivering the clean water which has you said , you bathe in it and drink it and wash food in it . you do everything with it . every one of us should have to run through in our minds how we use water every single day to understand the pressures and the real pain that families are going through . so i will make sure as president that i double and triple check . i will work with elected officials who i trust like your mayor and like your senators and member of congress so that we can assure you that when it's fixed , you can trust it . you deserve nothing less . 
clinton i called for those changes . i have been on the record and now i do have the toughest , most comprehensive plan to go after wall street . and not just the big banks , all the other financial interests that pose a threat to our economy . and i have said no bank is too big to fail and no executive is too powerful to jail , and i will use the powers that have now been passed by the congress , by president obama , who , incidentally , took a lot of money from wall street , which didn't stop him from signing into law the toughest regulations on the financial industry since the great depression . 
sanders well , why would i be running for the democratic nomination to be president of the united states ? but here is a good point . you know , in virtually all of the general election match up polls between trump and secretary clinton and trump and bernie sanders , in almost all of those polls , i do better than secretary clinton both in the cnn poll i was 20 points ahead of trump . i think secretary clinton was 12 points . and you know why ? because in fact a whole lot of people this may be a shock to the secretary , but there a whole lot of independents in this country . 
clinton 
clinton i have supported it . you know , we are in vigorous agreement here , senator . 
sanders well then if i don't answer it , then there's another front page , so it's yes . laughter and i mean this seriously . you know that . we've been through this . yes , his behavior was deplorable . have i ever once said a word about that issue ? no , i have not . i'm going to debate secretary clinton , governor o'malley , on the issues facing the american people , not bill clinton's personal behavior . 
sanders well , look . . . 
o'malley anderson , snowden put a lot of americans' lives at risk . snowden broke the law . whistleblowers do not run to russia and try to get protection from putin . if he really believes that , he should be back here . 
clinton oh , we're breaking ? ok . commercial break 
sanders let me put those proposals and you're absolutely right . that is what i want to do . that is what is going to have to happen , if we want to revitalize and rebuild the crumbling middle class . in the last 30 years , there has been a massive redistribution of wealth . and i know that term gets my republican friends nervous . the problem is , this redistribution has gone in the wrong direction . trillions of dollars have gone from the middle class and working families to the top one tenth of one percent who have doubled the percentage of wealth they now own . yes , i do believe that we must end corporate loopholes , such that major corporations year after year pay virtually zero in federal income tax , because they're stashing the money in the cayman islands . yes , i do believe there must be a tax on wall street speculation . we bailed out wall street . it's their time to bail out the middle class , help our kids be able to go to college tuition free . so we pay for this by do demanding that the wealthiest people and the largest corporations , who have gotten away with murder for years , start paying their fair share . 
sanders we will get them out . 
sanders . . . do i not ? 
clinton well , i think that the people here in the region , who knew about this and failed to follow what you just said , rightly , the law required , have been eliminated from the epa . 
sanders well , i would shut down make i'd shut down what exists right now is that virtually every telephone call in this country ends up in a file at the nsa . that is unacceptable to me . but it's not just government surveillance . i think the government is involved in our e mails ; is involved in our websites . corporate america is doing it as well . if we are a free country , we have the right to be free . yes , we have to defend ourselves against terrorism , but there are ways to do that without impinging on our constitutional rights and our privacy rights . o'malley ? anderson , the nsa . . . 
sanders john , i had the honor of being chairman of the u . s . senate committee on veterans' affairs for two years . and in that capacity , i met with just an extraordinary group of people from world war ii , from korea , vietnam , all of the wars . people came back from iraq and afghanistan without legs , without arms . and i was determined to do everything that i could to make va health care the best in the world , to expand benefits to the men and women who put their lives on the line to defending . we brought together legislation supported by the american legion , the vfw , the dod , vietnam vets , all of the veterans organizations , which was comprehensive . clearly the best piece of veterans' legislation brought forth in decades . i could only get two republican votes on that . we ended up with 56 votes . we needed 60 . so what i had to do then is go back and start working on a bill that wasn't the bill that i wanted . sit down with people like john mccain . sit down with people like jeff miller , the republican chairman of the house , and work on a bill . it wasn't the bill that i wanted , but yet it turned out to be one of the more significant pieces of veterans' legislation passed in recent history . so the crisis was i lost what i wanted . but i had to stand up and come back and get the best that we could . 
o'malley thanks a lot . 
clinton . . . than even the executive orders that president obama has signed when i'm president . 
clinton right . 
clinton kathie , i think kathie the . . . 
sanders absolutely . in fact , climate change is directly related to the growth of terrorism . and if we do not get our act together and listen to what the scientists say , you're going to see countries all over the world this is what the cia says they're going to be struggling over limited amounts of water , limited amounts of land to grow their crops ask you're going to see all kinds of international conflict . but , of course , international terrorism is a major issue that we have got to address today . and i agree with much of what the secretary and the governor have said . but let me have one area of disagreement with the secretary . i think she said something like the bulk of the responsibility is not ours . well , in fact , i would argue that the disastrous invasion of iraq , something that i strongly opposed , has unraveled the region completely and led to the rise of al qaeda and to isis . now , in fact , what we have got to do and i think there is widespread agreement here is the united states cannot do it alone . what we need to do is lead an international coalition which includes very significantly the muslim nations in that region who are going to have to fight and defend their way of life . 
clinton well , lester , you're right . everywhere i go to campaign , i'm meeting families who are affected by the drug problem that mostly is opioids and heroin now , and lives are being lost and children are being orphaned . and i've met a lot of grandparents who are now taking care of grandchildren . so i have tried to come out with a comprehensive approach that , number one , does tell the states that we will work with you from the federal government putting more money , about a billion dollars a year , to help states have a different approach to dealing with this epidemic . the policing needs to change . police officers must be equipped with the antidote to a heroin overdose or an opioid overdose , known as narcan . they should be able to administer it . so should firefighters and others . we have to move away from treating the use of drugs as a crime and instead , move it to where it belongs , as a health issue . and we need to divert more people from the criminal justice system into drug courts , into treatment , and recovery . 
o'malley we passed a state version of the dream act . . . 
clinton and i have stood up and i have represented my constituents to the best of my abilities , and i'm very proud of that . 
sanders let me just pick up on this point . this whole discussion began because i commented , not making overall evaluation about the secretary . she was in ohio , i think , in september or november and she got up and said something like , i have beeni'm paraphrasing , i have been criticized because people think i'm a moderate . well , i am a moderate . that's where this came from . it wasn't me paraphrasing her . it is what she said , and all that i said was there's nothing wrong with being a moderate . but , you can't be a moderate , you can't a progressive . in terms of president obama , i think if we remember where this country was seven years ago , 800 , 000 jobs being lost every month , 1 . 4 trillion dollar deficit . the world's financial system on the verge of collapse . i think that president obama , vice president biden , and the democratic leadership in the house and the senate have done a fantastic job . we are in much better shape than we were seven years ago , although my republican colleagues seem to have forgotten where we were seven years ago . that's the fact , but , we still have a very long way to go . do i think president obama is a progressive ? yes , i do . i disagree with him on a number of issues including the trade agreement . but , yes , i think he has done an excellent job . 
clinton well , there's no daylight on the basic premise that there should be no bank too big to fail and no individual too powerful to jail . we agree on that . but where we disagree is the comments that senator sanders has made that don't just affect me , i can take that , but he's criticized president obama for taking donations from wall street , and president obama has led our country out of the great recession . senator sanders called him weak , disappointing . he even , in 2011 , publicly sought someone to run in a primary against president obama . now , i personally believe that president obama's work to push through the dodd frank . . . laughter the dodd frank bill and then to sign it was one of the most important regulatory schemes we've had since the 1930s . so i'm going to defend dodd frank and i'm going to defend president obama for taking on wall street , taking on the financial industry and getting results . 
clinton well , i never said it wasn't legitimate . i said that i have answered all the questions and i will certainly be doing so again before this committee . but i think it would be really unfair not to look at the entire picture . this committee has spent 4 . 5 million of taxpayer money , and they said that they were trying to figure out what we could do better to protect our diplomats so that something like benghazi wouldn't happen again . there were already seven committee reports about what to do . so i think it's pretty clear what their obvious goal is . 
sanders your story is for voting for every disastrous trade agreement , and voting for corporate america . did i vote against the wall street bailout ? when billionaires on wall street destroyed this economy , they went to congress and they said , please , we'll be good boys , bail us out . you know what i said ? i said , let the billionaires themselves bail out wall street . it shouldn't be the middle class of this country . 
sanders 
sanders . . . american involvement in regime change , you see that quite often . 
clinton well , i recall very well being on a debate stage , i think , about 25 times with then senator obama , debating this very issue . after the election , he asked me to become secretary of state . he valued my judgment , and i spent a lot of time with him . . . . . . in the situation room , going over some very difficult issues . you know , i i agree completely . we don't want american troops on the ground in syria . i never said that . what i said was we had to put together a coalition in fact , something that i worked on before i left the state department to do , and yes , that it should include arabs , people in the region . because what i worry about is what will happen with isis gaining more territory , having more reach , and , frankly , posing a threat to our friends and neighbors in the region and far beyond . so i think while you're talking about the tough decision that president obama had to make about osama bin laden , where i was one of his few advisers , or putting together that coalition to impose sanctions on iran i think i have a lot of evidence . . . crosstalk 
sanders the export import bank is often called the bank of boeing , because boeing corporation gets 40 percent of the revenue . 
clinton i agree completely . i couldn't have said it better myself . but i did want to i wanted to follow up . look , we need more americans to be involved in the political process . and i give senator sanders a lot of credit for really lighting a fire under many people young , old , everybody who sees a chance to be involved and have their voice heard . look at what's happening with the republicans . they are doing everything they can to prevent the voices of americans to be heard . they're trying to prevent people from registering to vote . so , we do need to take on the republicans very clearly and directly . but the other thing i just wanted quickly to say is , i think president obama deserves more credit than he gets for what he got done in washington , despite the republican obstructionists . 
clinton well i think a lot of people are understandably reacting out of fear and anxiety about what they're seeing . first what they saw in paris , now what they have seen in san bernardino . and mr . trump has a great capacity to use bluster and bigotry to inflame people and to make think there are easy answers to very complex questions . so what i would say is , number one , we need to be united against the threats that we face . we need to have everybody in our country focused on watching what happens and reporting it if it's suspicious , reporting what you hear . making sure that muslim americans don't feel left out or marginalized at the very moment when we need their help . 
clinton . . . and well funded . . . 
clinton well , i just think you're asking a question with a false choice . i believe if we lead an air coalition , which we are now in the position of doing and intensify it , if we continue to build back up the iraqi army , which has had some recent success in ramadi , as you know , if we get back talking to the tribal sheiks in anbar to try to rebuild those relationships , which were very successful , in going after al qaida in iraq , if we get the turks to pay more attention to isis than they're paying to the kurds , if we do put together the kind of coalition with the specific tasks that i am outlining , i think we can be successful in destroying isis . so that's what i'm focused on , that's what i've outlined and that's what i would do as president . 
clinton well , it'll start at the kitchen table , we'll see how it goes from there . and i . . . . . . i'm going to have the very best advisers that i can possibly have , and when it comes to the economy and what was accomplished under my husband's leadership and the '90s especially when it came to raising incomes for everybody and lifting more people out of poverty than at any time in recent history you bet . i'm going to ask for his ideas , i'm going ask for his advice , and i'm going use him as a goodwill emissary to go around the country to find the best ideas we've got , because i do believe , as he said , everything that's wrong with america has been solved somewhere in america . we just have to do more of it , and we have to reach out , especially into poor communities and communities of color , to give more people their own chance to get ahead . 
sanders you know , i think it is a little bit it is a little bit look , what happened at sandy hook , what happened in michigan , what has happened far too often all over this country is a terrible , terrible tragedy , and we have got to do everything we can , as i mentioned a moment ago , to end these mass killings . but , as i understand what your question is and , you're not the only person whose heart was broken . i know , i was there in the senate when we learned about this killing . it is almost unspeakable to talk about some lunatic walking into a i mean ; it is hard to even talk about it . we all feel that way . but it , as i understand it , anderson , and maybe i'm wrong , what you're really talking about is people saying let's end gun manufacturing in america . that's the implications of that , and i don't agree with that . 
clinton . . . we would not have rescued the auto industry . 
sanders i'm sorry ? 
sanders i have a difference of opinion with secretary clinton on this . our differences are fairly deep on this issue . we disagreed on the war in iraq . we both listened to the information from bush and cheney . i voted against the war . but i think and i say this with due respect that i worry too much that secretary clinton is too much into regime change and a little bit too aggressive without knowing what the unintended consequences might be . yes , we could get rid of saddam hussein , but that destabilized the entire region . yes , we could get rid of gadhafi , a terrible dictator , but that created a vacuum for isis . yes , we could get rid of assad tomorrow , but that would create another political vacuum that would benefit isis . so i think , yeah , regime change is easy , getting rid of dictators is easy . but before you do that , you've got to think about what happens the day after . and in my view , what we need to do is put together broad coalitions to understand that we're not going to have a political vacuum filled by terrorists , that , in fact , we are going to move steadily and maybe slowly toward democratic societies , in terms of assad , a terrible dictator . but i think in syria the primary focus now must be on destroying isis and working over the years to get rid of assad . that's the secondary issue . 
sanders i didn't leave anybody at the altar . i voted against that piece of legislation because it had guest worker provisions in it which the southern poverty law center talked about being semi slavery . guest workers are coming in , they're working under terrible conditions , but if they stand up for their rights , they're thrown out of the country . i was not the only progressive to vote against that legislation for that reason . tom harkin , a very good friend of hillary clinton's and mine , one of the leading labor advocates , also voted against that . 
sanders well , you got to ask you got to ask trump . all i can tell you is , with a huge deficit , with 47 million people living in poverty , with our inner cities collapsing , yeah , i do think countries like germany and u . k . and france and european countries whose economy , or at least its standard of living and health care and education , they're doing pretty well . so i would not be embarrassed as president of the united states to stay to our european allies , you know what , the united states of america cannot just support your economies . you got to put up your own fair share of the defense burden . nothing wrong with that . 
clinton absolutely . you know , i did put together the coalition to impose sanctions . i actually started the negotiations that led to the nuclear agreement , sending some much my closest aides to begin the conversations with the iranians . i'm very pleased we got that nuclear agreement . it puts a lid on the nuclear weapons program . we have to enforce it , there have to be consequences attached to it . but that is not our only problem with iran . we have to figure out how to deal with iran as the principal state sponsor of terrorism in the world . they are destabilizing governments in the region . they continue to support hezbollah and hamas in lebanon against israel . a lot of work that we have do is going to be incredibly hard . i'm prepared to do that work , but i believe , just as i did with imposing the sanctions , you have to get action for action . if we were to normalize relations right now , we would remove one of the biggest pieces of leverage we have to try to influence and change iranian behavior . the president doesn't think we should . i certainly don't think we should . i believe we have to take this step by step to try to reign in iranian aggression , their support for terrorism and the other bad behavior that can come back and haunt us . 
sanders i can tell you that adding up the fact you're not paying any private insurance , businesses are not paying any private insurance . the average middle class family will be saving thousands of dollars a year . 
webb anderson , i need to jump in inaudible . 
sanders look , wolf . . . 
clinton and we deserve answers about how these programs will actually work and how they would be paid for . 
sanders we have . . . 
clinton well , let me say i think we did a great deal to help the libyan people after qadafi's demise . and here's what we did . we helped them hold two successful elections , something that is not easy , which they did very well because they had a pent up desire to try to chart their own future after 42 years of dictatorship . i was very proud of that . we got rid of the chemical weapons stockpile that qadafi had , getting it out of libya , getting it away from militias or terrorist groups . we also worked to help them set up their government . we sent a lot of american experts there . we offered to help them secure their borders , to train a new military . they , at the end , when it came to security issues , wolf , did not want troops from any other country , not just us , european or other countries , in libya . and so we were caught in a very difficult position . they could not provide security on their own , which we could see and we told them that , but they didn't want to have others helping to provide that security . and the result has been a clash between different parts of the country , terrorists taking up some locations in the country . and we can't walk away from that . we need to be working with european and arab partners . . . 
sanders well , as i said earlier , i don't believe it is the business of the united states government to be overthrowing small countries around the world . and number two , when you get to puerto rico , there's an issue that we have not talked about . that little island is 73 billion in debt and the government now is paying interest rates of up to 11 percent . and many of the bonds that they are paying off were purchased by vulture capitalists for 30 cents on the dollar . and what i have said in talking to the leaders of puerto rico , we've got to bring people together . and it's not the people of puerto rico , or the children or the schools . 
sanders well , let me tell you , i don't want to break the bad news . laughter democrats are not always right . democrats have often supported corporate welfare . . . . . . democrats have supported disastrous trade agreements , but on this issue i do not believe in corporate welfare , and in fact , secretary clinton may know or not know , but as a member of the financial services committee , i worked hard and successfully to make sure that at least 20 percent of the money went to small businesses which is where it should go and not to profitable corporations and downsizing in our country . 
o'malley i believe calling it what it is , is to say radical jihadis . that's calling it what it is . but john , let's not fall into the trap of thinking that all of our muslim american neighbors in this country are somehow our enemies here . they are our first line of defense . and we are going to be able to defeat isis on the ground there , as well as in this world , because of the muslim americans in our country and throughout the world who understand that this brutal and barbaric group is perverting the name of a great world religion . and now , like never before , we need our muslim american neighbors to stand up and to and to be a part of this . 
sanders i do . 
sanders . . . criminal justice system , investing in jobs , and education not in jails and incarceration . 
sanders i remember president obama being on television maybe three months ago . showed the secretary members as well . she knows the president , i know the president . and he is generally speaking in public and he's not a very emotional guy . and he after the mass killing in oregon if my memory is correct , he said look . there to be honest with you , let's be honest . nobody has a magic solution to this problem . any lunatic tomorrow , any person can walk into a theater and do something horrific . and you know what ? for us to tell you that that absolutely will not happen would be untrue . but what the president said , he said look , this is a tough issue . but we have got to do everything we possibly can to minimize the possibility of these mass killings . you are looking at a guy who comes from a rural state with no gun control . i have a d minus voting record from the nra . you are looking at a guy who in 1988 lost a statewide election for congress because i was the only candidate who said you know what , i don't think it's a great idea in this country to be selling military style assault weapons which are designed to kill people . i lost that election by three votes . i agree with what the secretary said . we need to expand and improve the instant background checks . bottom line is people who should not have guns in america should not be able to buy guns in america . 
o'malley they are the architects . sure , we'll have an inclusive group but i won't be taking my orders from wall street . and look , let me say this . i put out a proposal . i was on the front lines when people lost their homes , when people lost their jobs . i was on the front lines as a governor fighting against fighting that battle . our economy was wrecked by the big banks of wall street . and secretary clinton , when you put out your proposal on wall street , it was greeted by many as , quote , unquote , weak tea . it is weak tea . it is not what the people expect of our country . we expect that our president will protect the main street economy from excesses on wall street . and that's why bernie's right . we need to reinstate a modern version of glass steagall and we should have done it already . 
o'malley well , maybe that's a healthy thing . laughter 
o'malley martha , thank you . tonight we have a different debate than the debates that we have been allowed to have so far , because tonight is different because of this reason , that in the course of this presidential campaign america has again been attacked by jihadi terrorists , american lives taken from us . so , yes , we must talk about our ideas to move our economy forward , but the first job of the president of the united states is to protect the people of the united states . i visited with a number of our neighbors in northern virginia at a mosque last friday . and as i looked out there at the eyes of our neighbors , i also looked in the eyes of veterans . i looked into the eyes of boy scouts . i looked into the eyes of moms and dads who would do anything in their power to protect our country's values and our freedoms . what our nation needs right now is to realize that , while we face a terrible danger , we also face a different sort of political danger . and that is the danger that democracies find themselves susceptible to when unscrupulous leaders try to turn us upon each other . what our country needs right now is new leadership that will bring us together around the values that unite us and the freedoms that we share as americans . we will rise to challenge of isil and we will rise together to the challenges that we face in our economy . but we will only do so if we hold true to the values and the freedoms that unite us , which means we must never surrender them to terrorists , must never surrender our americans values to racist , must never surrender to the fascist pleas of billionaires with big mouths . we are a better country than this . our enduring symbol is not the barbed wire fence , it is the statue of liberty . and america's best days are in front of us if we move forward together . 
o'malley there is no issue in american public policy that i have worked on more day in and day out than this painful issue of policing , of law enforcement , criminal justice and race in america . when i ran in 1999 , david , for mayor of baltimore , our city by that year had become the most addicted , violent , and abandoned in america . but we came together . i brought people together over some very deep racial divides . and we were able to put our city on the path for the biggest reduction in crime of any major city in america over the next ten years . as governor , we continued to work together . we reduced violent crime to 30 year lows . but get this . we also reduced incarceration rates to 20 year lows . so it is possible actually , to find the things that actually work , that we did , increasing drug treatment , using big data to better protect the lives of young people , cut juvenile crime in half , and it's also possible to improve how we police our police . but there wasn't a single day as mayor of baltimore that i wasn't asked whether i was delivering on the promise i made to police the police . we reported excessive force , discourtesy , use of lethal force . in fact , drove down to three of the four lowest years on record police use of lethal force . as a nation , we have to embrace this moment and make our departments more open , more transparent , and more accountable . just as we require every major department , every county to report its major crimes , we should require police departments to report their discourtesy , brutality , excessive force . there's so much work that can be done , so much we've learned to do better . we need to do it now as a nation . this is our time and our opportunity to do that . 
clinton i think that you can talk about islamists who clearly are also jihadists , but i think it's not particularly helpful to make the case that senator sanders was just making that i agree with , that we've got to reach out to muslim countries . we've got to have them be part of our coalition . if they hear people running for president who basically shortcut it to say we are somehow against islam , that was one of the real contributions , despite all the other problems , that george w . bush made after 9 11 when he basically said after going to a mosque in washington , we are not at war with islam or muslims . we are at war with violent extremism . we are at war with people who use their religion for purposes of power and oppression . and , yes , we are at war with those people . but i don't want us to be painting with too broad a brush . 
chafee . . . the american government was acting illegally . that's what the federal courts have said ; what snowden did showed that the american government was acting illegally for the fourth amendment . so i would bring him home . 
o'malley andrea . . . 
sanders that's when disastrous trade policies took place . 
clinton well , i'm going to respond to that , because i think it's a very important issue . and by the way , everybody , who , quote , got money in the quote , bailout , that also included money for the auto rescue has paid it back . so , the treasury was out nothing . now that will no longer happen because we have dodd frank and we will break up banks that pose a systemic threat to our economy . but let me say this . senator sanders has talked about free college for everybody . he's talked about universal , single payer health care for everybody . and yet , when you ask questions , as many of us have and more importantly , independent experts , it's very hard to get answers . and a lot of the answers say that this is going to be much more expensive than anything senator sanders is admitting to . this is going to increase the federal government dramatically . and , you know , my dad used to say , if it sounds too good to be true , it probably is . 
sanders yeah , but the rule includes equal got it . all right . laughter 
clinton but i'm telling you i will say it tonight . if only you look at the big banks , you may be missing the forest for the trees . crosstalk 
o'malley thank you . first of all , i would lay out an agenda to make wages go up again for all americans , rather than down . equal pay for equal work , making it easier rather than harder for people to join labor unions and bargain collectively for better wages ; getting 11 million of our neighbors out of the underground shadow economy by passing comprehensive immigration reform , raising the minimum wage to 15 an hour , however we can , wherever we can . secondly , i believe the greatest business opportunity to come to the united states of america in 100 years is climate change . and i put forward a plan to move us to a 100 percent clean electric energy grid by 2050 and create 5 million jobs along the way . 
clinton . . . well , you began it yesterday with your comments . . . 
clinton well , i've been talking to a lot of these families , and this is such an outrage , both because it's bad for our economy , we're a 70 percent consumption economy , people need to feel optimistic and confident , they need to believe their hard work is going to be rewarded , and it's bad for our democracy . it's absolutely the case that if people feel that the game is rigged , that has consequences . i think it's great standing up here with the senator and the governor talking about these issues , because you're not going to hear anything like this from any of the republicans who are running for president . they don't want to raise the minimum wage ; they don't want to do anything to increase incomes . at the center of my economic policy is raising incomes , because people haven't been able to get ahead , and the cost of everything , from college tuition to prescription drugs , has gone up . of course we have to raise the minimum wage . of course we have to do more to incentivize profit sharing , like we see with market basket right here in new hampshire and new england , where all of the employees get a chance to share in the profits . and we've got to do more on equal pay for equal work . that means pass the paycheck fairness act so we have transparency about how much people are making . that's the way to get women's wages up , and that's good for them and good for their families and good for our communities . and there is a lot we can do in college affordability . i have debt free tuition plans , free community college plans , getting student debt down . i also am very committed to getting the price of drugs down . and there's a lot . you can go to my website . . . 
clinton you know , look . i feel a great deal of sympathy for the families of the four brave americans that we lost at benghazi . and i certainly can't even imagine the grief that she has for losing her son , but she's wrong . she's absolutely wrong . i and everybody in the administration , all the people she named , the president , the vice president , susan rice , we were scrambling to get information that was changing , literally by the hour . and when we had information , we made it public . but then sometimes we had to go back and say we have new information that contradicts it . so i testified for 11 hours . anybody who watched that and listened to it knows that i answered every question that i was asked and when it was over the republicans had to admit they didn't learn anything . why ? because there had already been one independent investigation . there had been seven or eight congressional investigations , mostly led by republicans who all reached the same conclusions , that there were lessons to be learned . and this is not the first time we lost americans in a terrorist attack . we lost 3 , 000 people on 9 11 . we lost americans serving in embassies in tanzania and kenya when my husband was president . we lost 250 americans , both military and civilian , when ronald reagan was president in beirut . and at no other time were those tragedies were they politicized . instead people said , let's learn the lessons and save lives . and that's when i did . 
sanders let me respond let me respond to that . 
clinton since he has been making all kinds of comments . laughter i think it's fair to say , assad has killed , by last count , about 250 , 000 syrians . the reason we are in the mess we're in , that isis has the territory it has , is because of assad . i advocated arming the moderate opposition back in the day when i was still secretary of state , because i worried we would end up exactly where we are now . and so , when we look at these complex problems , i wish it could be either or . i wish we could say yes , let's go destroy isis and let's let assad continue to destroy syria , which creates more terrorists , more extremists by the minute . no . we now finally are where we need to be . we have a strategy and a commitment to go after isis , which is a danger to us as well as the region . . . sanders ? secretary . . . 
clinton and let'slet's . . . 
clinton thank you , john . well , thank you , john . i think it's important we put this in historic context . the united states has , unfortunately , been victimized by terrorism going back decades . in the 1980s , it was in beirut , lebanon , under president reagan's administration , and 258 americans , marines , embassy personnel , and others were murdered . we also had attacks on two of our embassies in tanzania , kenya , when my husband was president . again , americans murdered . and then , of course , 9 11 happened , which happened before there was an invasion of iraq . i have said the invasion of iraq was a mistake . but i think if we're ever going to really tackle the problems posed by jihadi extreme terrorism , we need to understand it and realize that it has antecedents to what happened in iraq and we have to continue to be vigilant about it . 
clinton 
sanders secretary clinton made this charge in previous debates and just repeating it doesn't make it truer . what you are talking about is what i think was what they call the unanimous consent , you know what that is , where basically , do we support libya moving to democracy ? well , you know what , i surely have always supported libya moving to democracy . but please do not confuse that with your active effort for regime change without contemplating what happened the day after . totally different issue . 
clinton of the people , the undocumented people living in our country , i do not want to see them deported . i want to see them on a path to citizenship . that is exactly what i will do . 
sanders not all that detailed . 
sanders well , there is no question . i mean , it really is an outrage . and it just continues , the seven and a half years of unbelievable obstructionism we have seen from these right wing republicans . i mean , a third grader in america understands the president of the united states has the right to nominate individuals to the u . s . supreme court . apparently everybody understands that except the republicans in congress . 
sanders we should we should learn we should learn from king abdullah of jordan , one of the few heroes in a very unheroic place . and what abdullah said is this is a war with a soul of islam and that muslim troops should be on the ground with our support and the support of other major countries . that is how we destroy isis , not with american troops in perpetual warfare . 
webb bernie , say my name so i can get into this . 
clinton . . . and to be really focused on how we build ladders of opportunity and tear down these barriers that stand in the way of people getting ahead . 
sanders the leader of goldman sachs is a billionaire who comes to congress and tells us we should cut social security , medicare , and medicaid . secretary clinton and you're not the only one , so i don't mean to just point the finger at you , you've received over 600 , 000 in speaking fees from goldman sachs in one year . i find it very strange that a major financial institution that pays 5 billion in fines for breaking the law , not one of their executives is prosecuted , while kids who smoke marijuana get a jail sentence . 
sanders you have sup . . . 
o'malley . . . immigration reform . it'll make wages go up in america 250 for every year . . . 
sanders . . . i want to make . . . 
sanders i have a lot of respect for president obama . i have worked with him time and time again on many , many issues . but here's where i do disagree . i believe that the power of corporate america , the power of wall street , the power of the drug companies , the power of the corporate media is so great that the only way we really transform america and do the things that the middle class and working class desperately need is through a political revolution when millions of people begin to come together and stand up and say our government is going to work for all of us , not just a handful of billionaires . 
chafee certainly , ending the wars . we've got to stop these wars . you have to have a new dynamic , a new paradigm . we just spent a half billion dollars arming and training soldiers , the rebel soldiers in syria . they quickly join the other side . we bombed the . . . crosstalk 
sanders i grew up in brooklyn , new york . . . . . . the son of an immigrant who came to this country from poland at the age of 17 without a nickel in his pocket , never made a whole lot of money , but was a very proud american , because this country gave him and my mom the opportunity to send their kids to college . i believe that this country has enormous potential if we have the guts to take on the big money interests who dominate our economic and political life . and i disagree with secretary clinton in the belief that you can get money from wall street , that you can get money for a super pac from powerful special interests , and then at the end of the day do what has to be done for the working families of this country . i just don't accept that . what i believe is that this country , if we stand together and not let the trumps of the world divide us up , can guarantee health care to all people as a right , can have paid family and medical leave , can make public colleges and universities tuition free , can lead the world in transforming our energy system and combatting climate change , can break up the large financial institutions , can demand that the wealthiest people in this country start paying their fair share of taxes . and we can do that when millions of people stand up , fight back , and create a government that works for all of us , not just the 1 percent . that is what the political revolution is about . that is what this campaign is about . and with your help , we're going to win here in new york . thank you . thank you . 
clinton absolutely . you know , this is what i've saying for the past year . no bank is too big to fail , no executive too powerful to jail . i have been talking about what we should be doing under dodd frank . i'm glad that senator sanders is now joining in talking about dodd frank , because dodd frank sets forth the approach that needs to be taken . i believe , and i will appoint regulators who are tough enough and ready enough to break up any bank that fails the test under dodd frank . there are two sections there . if they fail either one , that they're a systemic risk , a grave risk to our economy , or if they fail the other , that their living wills , which is what you're referring to , is inadequate . let's look at what is at stake here . we can never let wall street wreck main street again . i spoke out against wall street when i was a senator from new york . i have been standing up and saying continuously we have the law . we've got to execute under it . so , you're right . i will move immediately to break up any financial institution , but i go further because i want the law to extend to those that are part of the shadow banking industry . the big insurance companies , the hedge funds , something that i have been arguing for now a long time . . . 
sanders . . . let me respond to what the secretary said . we have a criminal justice system which is broken . who in america is satisfied that we have more people in jail than any other country on earth , including china ? disproportionately african american , and latino . who is satisfied that 51 of african american young people are either unemployed , or underemployed ? who is satisfied that millions of people have police records for possessing marijuana when the ceo's of wall street companies who destroyed our economy have no police records . 
o'malley john , there is not a serious economist who would disagree that the six big banks of wall street have taken on so much power and that all of us are still on the hook to bail them out on their bad bets . that's not capitalism , secretary clinton . that's crony capitalism . that's a wonderful business model . if you place bad bets , the taxpayers bail you out . but if you place good ones , you pocket it . look , i don't believe there's the model there's lots of good people that work in finance , secretary sanders , but secretary clinton , we need to step up and we need to protect main street from wall street and you can't do that by by campaigning as the candidate of wall street . i am not the candidate of wall street . . . 
clinton right . 
sanders . . . i'll tell you what i say . do you know what the other name of the export import bank is ? what it's called in washington ? it's called the bank of boeing because boeing itself gets 40 percent of the money discharged by the export import bank . seventy five percent of the funds going from the federal government , the export import bank , goes to large , profitable corporations . many of these corporations have shut down in america , and have gone abroad to exploit poor people . you know what ? i don't think it's a great idea for the american taxpayer to have to subsidize through corporate welfare profitable corporations who downsize in the united states of america . 
clinton no , it was the crime bill . 
sanders anderson , thank you very much . over the last several weeks i had the opportunity to meet with a number of residents of flint at a town meeting in flint , and i have to tell you what i heard , and what i saw literally shattered me . and , it was beyond belief that children in flint , michigan in the united states of america in the year 2016 are being poisoned . that is clearly not what this country should be about . as anderson indicated , there's a lot of blame to go around , and one of the points that i have made is that i believe the governor of this state should understand that his dereliction of duty was irresponsible . he should resign . but more importantly , what is happening in flint to a lesser degree is happening throughout this country . in recent years we have seen a proliferation of millionaires and billionaires , and increase in income and wealth inequality , and all over this country middle class families are struggling . cities and towns are struggling , in order to provide basic services . among many other things , we need to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure , our water systems , our waste water plants , our roads and our bridges . the wealthiest country in the history of the world has got to get its priorities right , take care of the people , no more tax breaks for billionaires . 
clinton . . . let me . . . let me say . . . 
sanders let me respond . 
sanders . . . yes or no ? 
sanders let me , you know , again , respectfully disagree with secretary clinton here . when you have three out of the four largest financial institutions in this country bigger today than they were when we bailed them out because they were too big to fail , when you have six financial institutions having assets equivalent to 58 percent of the gdp of america , while issuing two thirds of the credit cards and a third of the mortgages , look , i think if teddy roosevelt were alive today , that great trust buster would have said break them up . i think he would have been right . i think he would have said bring back a 21st century glass steagall legislation . i think that would have been right , as well . that's my view . 
clinton well , we're going to have to redo the way the prescription drug industry does business . for example , it is outrageous that we don't have an opportunity for medicare to negotiate for lower prices . in fact , american consumers pay the highest prices in the world for drugs that we help to be developed through the national institute of health and that we then tested through the fda . so there's more to my plan than just the cap . we have to go after price gouging and monopolistic practices and get medicare the authority to negotiate . 
clinton we have we have a difference of opinion . we both want to get to universal health care coverage . i did stand up to the special interests and the powerful forces , the health insurance companies and the drug companies . and perhaps that's why i am so much in favor of supporting president obama's signature accomplishment with the affordable care act , because i know how hard it was to get that passed , even with a democratic congress . so rather than letting the republicans repeal it or rather starting all over again , trying to throw the country into another really contentious debate , let's make the affordable care act work for everybody . . . 
clinton . . . not everybody else . 
o'malley martha , thank you . i want to thank all of the people who have tuned in tonight . i want to thank the great people of new hampshire , where despite all of the cynicism about big money and big banks taking over our politics , here in new hampshire , the individual matters . you know , my wife katie and i have four terrific kids , and like you , there's probably nothing we wouldn't do to give them a future that's safer , that's healthier , where they have more opportunity than our parents and grandparents gave to us . tonight , what you listened to was a healthy exchange of ideas about how we'd do that , that which we have always proven , the capacity to do better than any nation in the world , to take actions that include more of our people more fully in the economic , social and political life of our country . when you listened to the republican debate the other night , you heard a lot of anger and you had a lot of fear . well , they can have their anger and they can have their fear , but anger and fear never built america . we build our country by adopting wage and labor policies , including comprehensive immigration reform with a pathway of citizenship for all . we do it by investing in our country , by investing in infrastructure , by investing in the skills and the talents of our people with debt free college , and we can do it again . and we also create a better future for our kids when we square our shoulders to the great challenges of our times , whether it's terror trying to undermine our values or republican presidential candidates trying to get us to surrender our freedoms and our values in the face of this threat . the other big challenge we have is climate change . the greatest business opportunity to come to the united states of america in 100 years . we need to embrace this . i have put forward a plan that does this , that moves us to 100 percent clean electric grid by 2050 . join this campaign for the future . new leadership is what our country needs to move us out of these divided and polarized times . thank you . 
clinton well , the role has been defined by each person who's held it . and i am very grateful for all my predecessors and my successors because each of them not only did what she could to support her husband and our country but often chose to work on important issues that were of particular concern . obviously , mrs . obama has been a terrific leader when it comes to young people's health , particularly nutrition and exercise . and i think has had a big impact . so whoever is part of the family of a president has an extraordinary privilege of not only having a front row seat on history but making her or maybe his contribution . and with respect to my own husband , i am probably still going to pick the flowers and the china for state dinners and stuff like that . but i will certainly turn to him as prior presidents have for special missions , for advice , and in particular , how we're going to get the economy working again for everybody , which he knows a little bit about . 
sanders oh , you ah . booing 
sanders the point is , we have to make congress respond to the needs of the people , not big money . 
sanders well , john , let me concur with you and with all americans who are shocked and disgusted by what we saw in paris yesterday . together , leading the world , this country will rid our planet of this barbarous organization called isis . i'm running for president , because as i go around this nation , i talk to a lot of people . and what i hear is people's concern that the economy we have is a rigged economy . people are working longer hours for lower wages , and almost all of the new income and wealth goes to the top one percent . and then on top of that , we've got a corrupt campaign finance system in which millionaires and billionaires are pouring huge sums of money into super pacs heavily influencing the political process . what my campaign is about is a political revolution millions of people standing up and saying , enough is enough . our government belongs to all of us , and not just the hand full of billionaires . 
clinton yes , well , the point is that if we're going to be serious about this and not just try to score political points , we should know what's in dodd frank , and what's in dodd frank already gives the president the authority . . . crosstalk . . . with his regulators to make those decisions . 
sanders let me agree . you know , as the secretary knows , i chairedi had the privilege and the honor of chairing the senate committee on veterans' affairs . and it is interesting to me , you know , republicans give a lot of speeches about how much they love veterans . i work with the american legion , the vfw , the dav , the vietnam vets , and virtually every veterans organization to put together the most comprehensive piece of the veterans legislation in the modern history of america . that's what i did . and i brought it to the floor of the senate . every democrat voted for it , i got two republicans . we ended up with 56 votes and i couldn't get the 60 votes that i needed . that is pathetic . this was legislation supported by all of the veterans organizations , addressing many of the serious problems that veterans face in health care and in how we deliver benefits to them . so republicans talk a good game about veterans , but when it came to put money on the line to protect our veterans , frankly , they were not there . what i did next , rachel , is i had to retreat a little bit , i had to compromise . i did work with john mccain . i did work with jeff miller over in the house . and we put together not the bill that i wanted , but probably the most comprehensive v . a . health care bill in the modern history of this country . secretary clinton is absolutely right , there are people , koch brothers among others , who have a group called concerned veterans of america , funded by the koch brothers . the koch brothers , by the way , want to destroy social security , medicare , medicaid , every governmental program passed since the 1930s . yes , there are people out there who want to privatize it . the last point that i'd make . i had a hearing . i had all of the veterans groups in front of me . and i said to them , tell me when a veteran gets in to the v . a . , understanding there are waiting lines and real problems , when a veteran gets into the system , is the quality of care good ? without exception , what they said , good , excellent , very good . we've got to strengthen the v . a . we do not privatize the v . a . 
clinton now , there are things we can do to improve it , but to tear it up and start over again , pushing our country back into that kind of a contentious debate , i think is the wrong direction . 
sanders i think we have a disagreement , and the disagreement is that not only did i vote against the war in iraq . if you look at history , john , you will find that regime change whether it was in the early '50s in iran , whether it was toppling salvador allende in chile , whether it is overthrowing the government of guatemala way back when these invasions , these toppling of governments , regime changes have unintended consequences . i would say that on this issue , i'm a little bit more conservative than the secretary . . . 
sanders . . . look , i hear what the secretary said , and i understand , but look , there areall of us know that we have seen in recent years horrible , horrible crimes . it's hard to imagine how people can do , bomb , and kill 168 people in oklahoma city , or do the boston marathon bombing , but this is what i believe , and for a couple of reasons . number one , too many innocent people , including minorities , african americans , have been executed when they were not guilty . that's number one . we have to be very careful about making sure about that . but , second of all , and maybe , in a deeper reason , of course there are barbaric acts out there . but , in a world of so much violence and killing , i just don't believe that government itself should be part of the killing . so , when somebody commits . . . . . . somebody commits any of these terrible crimes that we have seen , you lock them up , and you toss away the key . they're never going to get out . but , i just don't' want to see government be part of killing . that's all . 
o'malley yes , thank you . yes , lester , what secretary clinton just said is actually not true . what i have put forward a plan that would actually put cops back on the beat of wall street . i have put forward a plan that was heralded as very comprehensive and realistic . look , if a bank robber robs a bank and all you do is slap him on the wrist , he's just going to keep robbing banks again . the same thing is true with people in suits . secretary clinton , i have a tremendous amount of respect for you , but for you to say there's no daylight on this between the three of us is also not true . i support reinstituting a modern version of glass steagall that would include going after the shadow banks , requiring capital requirements that would force them to no longer put us on the hook for these sorts of things . in prior debates i've heard you even bring up i mean , now you bring up president obama here in south carolina in defense of the fact of your cozy relationship with wall street . in an earlier debate , i heard you bring up even the 9 11 victims to defend it . the truth of the matter is , secretary clinton , you do not go as far as reining in wall street as i would . and the fact of the matter is , the people of america deserve to have a president that's on their side , protecting the main street economy from excesses on wall street . and we're just as vulnerable today . 
clinton two quick responses . one , with respect to the central american children , i made it very clear that those children needed to be processed appropriately , but we also had to send a message to families and communities in central america not to send their children on this dangerous journey in the hands of smugglers . i've also called for the end of family detention , for the end of privately run detention centers , along with private prisons , which i think are really against the common good and the rule of law . and with respect to the 2007 bill , this was ted kennedy's bill . and i think ted kennedy had a very clear idea about what needed to be done . and i was proud to stand with him and support it . 
sanders that is exactly what releasing the transcripts will tell us . this i do know . this i do know . there is a reason why wall street has provided 15 million just in the last reporting period to the secretary's super pac . now , the secretary says it doesn't influence her . well , that's what every politician says who gets money from special interests . 
sanders well , thank you very much for hosting this debate , and let me applaud my colleagues up here . because i think frankly , maybe i'm wrong , but on our worst day , i think we have a lot more to offer the american people than the right wing's extremists . my father came to this country from poland at the age of 17 without a nickel in his pocket , which sparked my interest in the need for immigration reform because i know what it's like to be the son of an immigrant . we grew up in a three and a half room , rent controlled apartment in brooklyn , new york . my mother's dream and she died very young , but my mother's dream for her whole life was to be able to get out of that rent controlled apartment and own a home of her own . she never lived to see that . 
sanders . . . that's true . 
sanders 
sanders but i want to talk i want to talk about something else , because secretary clinton i think made some interesting and good points . what you have now is a very dangerous moment in american history . the secretary is right our people are fearful . they are anxious on a number of levels . they are anxious about international terrorism and the possibility of another attack on america . we all understand that . but you know what else they're anxious about ? they're anxious about the fact that they are working incredibly long hours , they're worried about their kids , and they're seeing all the new income and wealth virtually all of it going to the top 1 percent . and they're looking around them , and they're looking at washington , and they're saying the rich are getting much richer , i'm getting poorer , what are you going to do about it ? what are you going to do for my kids ? and somebody like a trump comes along and says , i know the answers . the answer is that all of the mexicans , they're criminals and rapists , we've got to hate the mexicans . those are your enemies . we hate all the muslims , because all of the muslims are terrorists . we've got to hate the muslims . meanwhile , the rich get richer . so what i say to those people who go to donald trump's rallies , understand he thinks a low minimum wage in america is a good idea . he thinks low wages are a good idea . i believe we stand together to address the real issues facing this country , not allow them to divide us by race or where we come from . let's create an america that works for all of us , not the handful on top . 
clinton well , i think both of us , both senator sanders and i , voted numerous times to enhance border security along our border . we increased the number of border security agents . we did vote for money to build a fence , a pedestrian fence in some place , a vehicle fence in other places . and the result is that we have the most secure border we've ever had . apprehensions coming across the border are the lowest they've been in 40 years , which just strengthens my argument that now it's time to do comprehensive immigration reform . the republicans , the opponents no longer have an argument . and certainly , we hear a lot coming from the republican side that is absolutely out of touch with reality . we raised money through the congressional appropriations process . we enhanced the border security . that part of the work is done . everybody that i know has looked at it said , okay , we have a secure border . there's no need for this rhetoric and demagoguery that's still is carried out on the republican side . you've run out of excuses . let's move to comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship . and i think that makes a very strong argument in favor of doing it . 
clinton well , it would depend on what i got for it and i can tell you what we got in the first term , we got a new start treaty to reduce nuclear weapons between the united states and russia . we got permission to resupply our troops in afghanistan by traveling across russia . we got russia to sign on to our sanctions against iran and other very important commitments . so look , in diplomacy , you are always trying to see how you can figure out the interest of the other to see if there isn't some way you can advance your security and your values . when putin came back in the fall of 2011 , it was very clear he came back with a mission . and i began speaking out as soon as that happened because there were some fraudulent elections held , and russians poured out into the streets to demand their freedom , and he cracked down . and in fact , accused me of fomenting it . so we now know that he has a mixed record to say the least and we have to figure out how to deal with him . 
clinton and , we'll get to what we need to do to help the children and the people when i have a little more time because that's just as important as fixing the pipes . 
clinton . . . and would give regulators the authority to go after the big banks . 
sanders we're going to work with state governments all over this country . and you know what ? in a very divided congress , and a very divided politics in america , actually the one area where there is some common ground is conservatives understand that it's insane to be spending 80 billion a year locking up 2 . 2 million people . with federal and presidential leadership , we will work with state governments to make sure that people are released from jail under strong supervision , that they get the kind of job training and education they need so they can return to their communities . on this one , errol , actually i think you're going to see progressive and conservative support . we can do it , if we're prepared to be bold . 
clinton well , look , you know , when people say that it's always the republicans or their sympathizers who say , you can't have paid leave , you can't provide health care . they don't mind having big government to interfere with a woman's right to choose and to try to take down planned parenthood . they're fine with big government when it comes to that . i'm sick of it . you know , we can do these things . we should not be paralyzed we should not be paralyzed by the republicans and their constant refrain , big government this , big government that , that except for what they want to impose on the american people . i know we can afford it , because we're going to make the wealthy pay for it . that is the way to get it done . 
clinton yes , well , first of all first of all , paul krugman , barney frank , others have all endorsed my plan . secondly , we have dodd frank . it gives us the authority already to break up big banks that pose . . . 
o'malley okay , thank you . i have look , i would agree with much of what senator sanders says , kevin . i believe that actually affordable college , debt free college is the goal that we need to attain as a nation . and , unlike my two distinguished colleagues on this stage , i actually made college more affordable and was the only state that went four years in a row without a penny's increase to college tuition . i respectfully disagree with senator sander's approach . i believe that the goal should be debt free college . i believe that our federal government needs to do more on pell grants . states need to stop cutting higher education , and we should create a new block grant program that keeps the states' skin in the game , and we should lower these outrageous interest rates that parents and kids are being charged by their own government . 7 percent and 8 percent to go to college ? i mean , my dad went to college on a g . i . bill after coming home from japan , flying 33 missions . my daughters went to college on a mountain of bills . we were proud of them on graduation day , but we're going to be proud every month for the rest of our natural lives . it it doesn't need to be that way . we can have debt free college in the united states . 
sanders hey , i'm in the united states senate , and anyone who doesn't think that there is an enormous amount of waste and inefficiency and bureaucracy throughout government would be very , very mistaken . i believe in government , but i believe in efficient government , not wasteful government . 
sanders i will . . . 
sanders a statement that was refuted by the governor of the state of vermont , who was a supporter of hers , who said , yeah , in campaigns people tend to exaggerate . here is the fact on guns . let's talk about guns . that horrible , horrible sandy hook what's the word we want to use , murder , assault , slaughter , unspeakable act . back in 1988 , i ran for the united states congress one seat in the state of vermont . i probably lost that election , which i lost by three points , because i was the only candidate running who said , you know what ? we should ban assault weapons , not seen them sold or distributed in the united states of america . i've got a d minus voting record from the nra . and , in fact , because i come from a state which has virtually no gun control , i believe that i am the best qualified candidate to bring back together that consensus that is desperately needed in this country . 
clinton absolutely not . i have a three point plan that does not include american ground forces . it includes the united states leading an air coalition which is what we're doing , supporting fighters on the ground ; the iraqi army which is beginning to show more ability , the sunni fighters that we are now helping to reconstitute and kurdish on both sides of the border . i think we also have try to disrupt their supply chain of foreign fighters and foreign money and we do have to contest them in online space . so i'm very committed to both going after isis but also supporting what secretary kerry is doing to try to move on a political diplomatic to try to begin to slow down and hopefully end the carnage in syria which is the root of so many of the problems that we seen in the region and beyond . 
o'malley my name is martin o'malley , former mayor of baltimore , former governor of maryland , a life long democrat , and most importantly , a husband , and a father . my wife katie and i have four great kids , grace , and tara , and william and jack . and , like you , there is nothing we wouldn't do to give them healthier and better lives . there are some things that i have learned to do better in life than others . and , after 15 years of executive experience , i have learned how to be an effective leader . whether it was raising the minimum wage , making our public schools the best in america , passing marriage equality , the dream act , and comprehensive gun safety legislation , i have learned how to get things done because i am very clear about my principals . thanks to president obama , our country has come a long way since the wall street crash of 2008 . our country's doing better , we are creating jobs again . but we elected a president , not a magician , and there is urgent work that needs to be done right now . for there is a deep injustice , an economic injustice that threatens to tear our country apart , and it will not solve itself . injustice does not solve itself . what i'm talking about is this , our middle class is shrinking . our poor families are becoming poorer , and 70 percent of us are earning the same , or less than we were 12 years ago . we need new leadership , and we need action . the sort of action that will actually make wages go up again for all american families . our economy isn't money , it's people . it's all of our people , and so we must invest in our country , and the potential of our kids to make college a debt free option for all of our families , instead of settling our kids with a lifetime of crushing debt . and , we must square our shoulders to the great challenge of climate change and make this threat our opportunity . the future is what we make of it . we are all in this together . and , the question in this election is whether you and i still have the ability to give our kids a better future . i believe we do , that is why i am running for president , and i need your help . thank you . 
clinton well , david , i think this is one of the most important challenges facing not just our next president but our country . we have systemic racism and injustice and inequities in our country and in particular , in our justice system that must be addressed and must be ended . i feel very strongly that we have to reform our criminal justice system and we have to find ways to try to bring law enforcement together again with the communities that they are sworn to protect . trust has been totally lost in a lot of places . at the same time , we know that in many parts of our country police officers are bridging those divides and they're acting heroically . the young officer who was killed responding to the planned parenthood murders . the officer who told the victims of the san bernardino killings that he would take a bullet before them . so i think that we need to build on the work of the policing commissioner that president obama impaneled . we need to get a bipartisan commitment to work together on this . and we need to hear the voices of those men and women and boys and girls who feel like strangers in their own country and do whatever is necessary to not only deal with the immediate problems within the criminal justice system , but more opportunities , more jobs , better education so that we can begin to rebuild that very valuable asset known as trust . 
sanders i don't know and with all due respect to the secretary , wall street played by the rules ? who are we kidding ? the business model of wall street is fraud . that's what it is . and we have and let me make this promise . one of the problems we have had i think all americans understand this , is whether it's republican administrations or democratic administrations , we have seen wall street and goldman sachs dominate administrations . here's my promise wall street representatives will not be in my cabinet . 
o'malley during the cold war during the cold war , we got into a bad habit of always looking to see who was wearing the jersey of the communists , and who was wearing the u . s . jersey . we got into a bad habit of creating big bureaucracies , old methodologies , to undermine regimes that were not friendly to the united states . look what we did in iran with mossadegh . and look at the results that we're still dealing with because of that . i would suggest to you that we need to leave the cold war behind us , and we need to put together new alliances and new approaches to dealing with this , and we need to restrain ourselves . i mean , i know secretary clinton was gleeful when gadhafi was torn apart . and the world , no doubt is a better place without him . but look , we didn't know what was happening next . and we fell into the same trap with assad , saying as if it's our job to say , assad must go . we have a role to play in this world . but we need to leave the cold war and that sort of antiquated thinking behind . 
sanders and the reason that i was one of the first , not one of the last to be in opposition to the tpp is that american workers . . . . . . should not be forced to compete against people in vietnam today making a minimum wage of 0 . 65 an hour . look , what we have got to do is tell corporate america that they cannot continue to shut down . we've lost 60 , 000 factories since 2001 . they're going to start having to , if i'm president , invest in this country not in china , not in mexico . 
sanders this is what i think . i think that the american people are never going to elect a president who insults mexicans , who insults muslims , who insults women , who insults african americans . and let us not forget that several years ago , trump was in the middle of the so called birther movement , trying to delegitimize the president of the united states of america . you know , i find it very interesting , karen , my dad was born in poland . i know a little bit about the immigrant experience . nobody has ever asked me for my birth certificate . maybe it has something to do with the color of my skin . 
webb our greatest long term strategic challenge is our relation with china . our greatest day to day threat is cyber warfare against this country . our greatest military operational threat is resolving the situations in the middle east . 
o'malley the national rifle association . 
sanders let me let's so that everybody knows , the bill that secretary clinton is talking about , that is that was the bailout of the recklessness , irresponsibility and illegal behavior of wall street . it was the wall street bailout . and i find it interesting that when secretary clinton , who was the former senator of new york , of course , when she defended her vote , she said , well , it's going to help the big banks in new york . those are my constituents . and then you go to detroit and suddenly this legislation helps the automobile workers . there was an article just yesterday . . . 
sanders it is corporate welfare and yes , i oppose corporate welfare . 
o'malley yes , but we're going to have to get 20 minutes to do it , so . laughter 
clinton . . . that i think dodd frank was a very . . . 
sanders wolf . wolf . 
chafee no , that was another 99 to one vote for the patriot act , and it was seen as at the time modernizing our ability to do what we've always done to tap phones which always required a warrant . and i voted for that . 
o'malley anderson , thank you . i am very , very grateful to have been able to be on this stage with this distinguished group of candidates tonight . and what you heard tonight , anderson , was a very , very and all of you watching at home was a very , very different debate than from the sort of debate you heard from the two presidential republican debates . on this stage on this stage , you didn't hear anyone denigrate women , you didn't hear anyone make racist comments about new american immigrants , you didn't hear anyone speak ill of another american because of their religious belief . what you heard instead on this stage tonight was an honest search for the answers that will move our country forward , to move us to a 100 percent clean electric energy grid by 2050 , to take the actions that we have always taken as americans so that we can actually attack injustice in our country , employ more of our people , rebuild our cities and towns , educate our children at higher and better levels , and include more of our people in the economic , social , and political life of our country . i truly believe that we are standing on the threshold of a new era of american progress . unless you've become discouraged about our gridlock in congress , talk to our young people under 30 , because you'll never find among them people that want to bash immigrants or people that want to deny rights to gay couples . that tells me we are moving to a more connected , generous , and compassionate place , and we need to speak to the goodness within our country . 
clinton . . . we both agree with campaign finance reform . 
clinton well , let me just let me just say , once again . . . . . . that , having been in the trenches fighting for this , i believe strongly we have to guarantee health care . i believe we are on the path to doing that . the last thing we need is to throw our country into a contentious debate about health care again . and we are not england . we are not france . we inherited a system that was set up during world war ii ; 170 million americans get health insurance right now through their employers . so what we have tried to do and what president obama succeeded in doing was to build on the health care system we have , get us to 90 percent coverage . we have to get the other 10 percent of the way to 100 . i far prefer that and the chances we have to be successful there than trying to start all over again , gridlocking our system , and trying to get from zero to 100 percent . 
clinton well , i think you have to look at both the terrorism challenge that we face abroad and certainly at home and the role that guns play in delivering the violence that stalks us . clearly , we have to have a very specific set of actions to take . you know , when senator sanders talks about a coalition , i agree with him about that . we've got to build a coalition abroad . we also have to build a coalition at home . abroad , we need a coalition that is going to take on isis . i know how hard that is . i know it isn't something you just hope people will do and i've worked on that . . . 
sanders it's not a question of being better than president obama , it is a question of building on the work that president obama has done , the very important work . 
o'malley . . . dare to petition a referendum . . . 
sanders i'm on the committee , i know a little bit about this , i'm on the committee , health , education , labor committee that helped write the affordable care act . and it has done a number of good things . but when secretary clinton says , well , 90 percent of the people have insurance , yes , not really . many of you may have insurance , but you have outrageously high deductibles and co payments . one out of five americans cannot afford the prescription drugs their doctors prescribe . elderly people are cutting their pills in half . i do believe that we should do what every other major country on earth does , and i think when the american people stand up and fight back , yes , we can have it , a medicare for all health care system . 
sanders well , obviously , i voted , when president clinton said , let's stop ethnic cleansing in kosovo , i voted for that . i voted to make sure that osama bin laden was held accountable in afghanistan . when our country is threatened , or when our allies are threatened , i believe that we need coalitions to come together to address the major crises of this country . i do not support the united states getting involved in unilateral action . 
sanders i don't believe that any . . . crosstalk 
clinton yes , well , i . . . applause 
sanders all right . essentially what you described is my legislation , which includes inaudible . . . now , we've got here is the issue . your answer has been the same year after year . in fact , the idea that i'm bringing forth , i have to admit it , you know , it wasn't my idea . it was barack obama's idea in 2008 , the exact same idea . he called for lifting the cap , which is now higher it's at 118 and starting at 250 and going on up . if you do that , you're going to extend the life of social security for 58 years . you will significantly expand benefits by 1 , 300 bucks a year for seniors and disabled vets under 16 , 000 a year . what's wrong with that ? are you prepared to support it ? 
sanders i think everybody is in agreement that we are a great entrepreneurial nation . we have got to encourage that . of course , we have to support small and medium sized businesses . but you can have all of the growth that you want and it doesn't mean anything if all of the new income and wealth is going to the top 1 percent . so what we need to do is support small and medium sized businesses , the backbone of our economy , but we have to make sure that every family in this country gets a fair shake . . . 
sanders well , first of all , that's not quite accurate . i was here long before that . i will you what i did . what i did was meet very quietly in detroit with parents and others who were impacted by this disaster . and the second thing i did is hold a town meeting , which was as nonpolitical as i could make it for hundreds of people to tell me and the world through the media exactly what was happening here in flint . i think the fear and the legitimate fear of the people of flint is that a certain point the tv cameras and cnn will disappear . and people are going to be left struggling in order to live in a safe and healthy community . all i can say is if you check my record going back a long time , i have stood with those who are hurting . i have stood with those who have no money , and i have taken on virtually every powerful special interest in the united states of america . that's my record and i'm proud of it . 
sanders . . . former senators said , no , this wasn't the automobile bailout . it was the bailout of wall street . 
sanders anderson , the bottom line is , and what my campaign is , is changing our national priorities . we need a government that works for all of us . . . 
clinton well , i'm very proud of the iran nuclear agreement . i was very pleased to be part of what the president put into action when he took office . i was responsible for getting those sanctions imposed which put the pressure on iran . it brought them to the negotiating table which resulted in this agreement . and so , they have been so far , following their requirements under the agreement . but i think we still have to carefully watch them . we've had one good day over 36 year and i think we need more good days before we move more rapidly toward any kind of normalization . and we have to be sure that they are truly going to implement the agreement . and then , we have to go after them on a lot of their other bad behavior in the region which is causing enormous problems in syria , yemen , iraq and elsewhere . 
sanders pardon me ? 
sanders all right , so . . . 
clinton because because after all excuse me . 
sanders judy , if i can , there is no question , secretary clinton and i are friends , and i have a lot of respect for her , that she has enormous experience in foreign affairs . secretary of state for four years . you've got a bit of experience , i would imagine . but judgment matters as well . judgment matters as well . and she and i looked at the same evidence coming from the bush administration regarding iraq . i lead the opposition against it . she voted for it . but more importantly , in terms of this libya resolution that you have noted before , this was a virtually unanimous consent . everybody voted for it wanting to see libya move toward democracy , of course we all wanted to do that . that is very different than talking about specific action for regime change , which i did not support . 
clinton the answer to both of those is no . i'm interested in making what we have work better . i want to streamline programs that are duplicative and redundant . i want to have a top to bottom review about what works and what doesn't work , and be absolutely clear we're getting rid of what doesn't work . i have had the opportunity to run a big agency . i was very flattered when henry kissinger said i ran the state department betterbetter than anybody had run it in a long time . so i have an idea of what it's going to take to make our government work more efficiently . and when you put together a budget , you have to make a lot of hard decisions , but i think it's not appropriate to say i'm going to get rid of this , get rid of that until you have a very good process that gives you the information about what to do . but i want to add something else , you know , because look , we have so much work to do in our country , and i think it's the greatest work that americans will be called to do . and of course , we have to have people in every community involved in it . we have to have the political voice , the political grassroots speaking up and speaking out about what we have to try to accomplish in washington . but we also need to have a very clear set of goals that we are going to achieve , and we need to level with the american people about what they are , what they will cost , what will be expected of our citizenry . so i see as president having a constant dialogue with americans here's what we're trying to get done , here's why i need your help , here's why you may think comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship isn't something you care about , but i'm telling you it will help fix the labor market , it will bring people out of the shadows 
clinton . . . in recent weeks , and let's talk . . . booing . . . let's talk about about the issues . let's talk about the issues that divide us . 
sanders yeah , you can , because african americans and latinos not only face the general economic crises of low wages , and high unemployment , and poor educational opportunities , but they face other problems , as well . so , yes , we can talk about it as a racial issue . but it is a general economic issue . and here's what the economic issue is . the wages that high school graduates receive today are significantly less , whether you are white or black , than they used to be . why is that ? because of a series of disastrous trade policies which have allowed corporate america through nafta and permanent normal trade relations with china , secretary clinton and i disagree on those issues . but view is those trade policies have enabled corporate america to shut down in this country , throw millions of people out on the street . now no one thinks that working in the factory is the greatest job in the world . but you know what , you can make a middle class wage , you have decent health care , decent benefits . you once had a pension . those jobs , in many cases , are now gone . they're off to china . now you are a worker , white worker , black worker , who had a decent job , that manufacturing job is gone . what have you got now ? you are working at mcdonald's ? that is why there is massive despair all over this country . people have worked their entire lives . they're making a half , two thirds what they used to make . their kids are having a hard time finding any work at all . and that's why this study , which shows that if you can believe it today , for white working class people between 45 and 54 , life expectancy is actually going down . suicide , alcoholism , drugs , that's why we need to start paying attention to the needs of working families in this country , and not just a handful of billionaires who have enormous economic and political power . 
sanders of course i can work with them , but let's be clear . when i talked about boeing and i talked about general electric , what i was referring to is an outrage . i suspect the secretary agrees request me . right now you have a loophole such that these guys are putting their profits , multi billion dollar profitable corporations putting billions of dollars into the cayman islands , bermuda , and other tax havens . and in a given year , rachel , after making billions of dollars in profit , do you know how much they're paying in taxes to the united states government in a given year ? zero . now explain to me how that makes any sense at all . so what i have said with regard to boeing and ge and other multinationals that pay zero taxes , you know what we're going to do ? we're going to end that loophole . they are going to pay their fair share of taxes . we're going to use that money to rebuild our infrastructure and create up to 13 million jobs . can i work with corporations ? are there good corporations doing incredible cutting edge research and development ? absolutely they are . and we should be proud of them . but on the other hand , there are many corporations who have turned their backs on the american worker , who have said , if i can make another nickel in profit by going to china and shutting down in the united states of america , that's what i will do . i will do my best to transform our trade policy and take on these corporations who want to invest in low income countries around the world rather than in the united states of america . 
clinton i think , as commander in chief , you've got to constantly be evaluating the decisions you have to make . i know a little bit about this , having spent many hours in the situation room , advising president obama . and i want to just add to something that senator sanders said , the united states had a very big interest in trying to help stabilize the region . if there is any blame to be spread around , it starts with the prime minister of iraq , who sectarianized his military , setting shia against sunni . it is amplified by assad , who has waged one of the bloodiest , most terrible attacks on his own people 250 , 000 plus dead , millions fleeing . causing this vacuum that has been filled unfortunately , by terrorist groups , including isis . so , i think we are in the midst of great turmoil in this region . we have a proxy conflict going on between saudi arabia and iran . you know , one of the criticisms i've had of senator sanders is his suggestion that , you know , iranian troops be used to try to end the war in syria . . . 
clinton mm hmm . 
sanders inaudible . 
clinton well , first , let me say i think i have the most comprehensive plan to combat climate change . it sets some very big goals , a half billion more solar panels deployed by the end of my first term , if i'm so fortunate to be president . and enough clean energy to power every home by the end of my second term . what i am looking at is how we make the transition from where we are today to where are today to where we must be . i worked with president obama during the four years i was secretary of state to begin to put pressure on china and india and other countries to join with us to have a global agreement which we finally got in paris . so i am committed to and focused on how we make that transition . i've already said we are taking away the subsidies for oil and gas , but it is important that people understand that a president can't go ordering folks around . our system doesn't permit that . i am going to set the goals . i will push everybody as hard as i can to achieve those goals . we will make progress on clean renewable energy and create millions of jobs through that . 
clinton oh , absolutely . the president decided to leave more troops than he had originally planned in afghanistan . we have a very cooperative government there , with ashraf ghani and his tophis top partner , abdullah . and they are doing their very best . and the afghan army is actually fighting . the afghan army is taking heavy losses defending afghan territory . and i would have to make an evaluation based on the circumstances at the time i took office as to how much help they continue to need . because it's not just the taliban . we now are seeing outposts of , you know , fighters claiming to be affiliated with isis . so , we've got this arc of instability from north africa to south asia , and we have to pay close attention to it . and we have to build coalitions , something that i did to take on the iranian nuclear program , and what i will do as president to make sure that we defeat these terrorist networks . 
clinton i don't think a halt is necessary . what we have to do is put all of our resources through the department of homeland security , through the state department , through our intelligence agencies , and we have to have an increased vetting and screening . now , this takes , david , 18 months to 24 months , two years . so i know it's not going to happen overnight and everything that can be done should be done . but the process should move forward while we are also taking on isis , putting together the kind of strategy that i've advocated for , and making sure that the vetting and the screening is as tough as possible . because i do believe that we have a history and a tradition , that is part of our values system and we don't want to sacrifice our values . we don't want to make it seem as though we are turning into a nation of fear instead of a nation of resolve . so i want us to have a very tough screening process but i want that process to go forward . and if at the end of 18 months , 24 months there are people who have been cleared , and i would prioritize widows , and orphans , and the elderly , people who may have relatives , families , or have nowhere else to go . i would prioritize them . and that would i think give the american public a bit more of a sense of security about who is being processed and who might end up coming as refugees . 
sanders i would say thatthat folks who have looked at this issue for a long time , whether it's elizabeth warren or many other economists , will tell you that right now , yes , we do need a 21st century glass steagall legislation . and i would tell you also that when you have three out of the four largest banks in america today , bigger than they weresignificantly bigger than when we bailed them out because they were too big to fail , i think if teddy roosevelt were alive today , a good republican by the way , what he would say is break them up ; they are too powerful economically ; they are too powerful politically . and that is what i believe and many economists believe . time to break them up . 
clinton . . . good start , and i think that we have to implement it . we have to prevent the republicans from ripping it apart . we have to save the consumer financial protection board , which is finally beginning to act to protect consumers . we have work to do . you've got no argument from me . but i know , if we don't come in with a very tough and comprehensive approach , like the plan i'm recommending , we're gonna be behind instead of ahead . . . 
sanders we have a lot of work to do . we have a lot of work to do . but i recall when secretary clinton ran against then senator obama , she was critical of him for suggesting that maybe you want to talk to iran , that you want to talk to our enemies . i have no illusion . of course you are right . iran is sponsoring terrorism in many parts of the world , destabilizing areas . everybody knows that . but our goal is , in fact , to try over a period of time to , in fact , deal with our enemies , not just ignore that reality . crosstalk 
sanders i think the president is trying very hard to thread a tough needle here , and that is to support those people who are against assad , against isis , without getting us on the ground there , and that's the direction i believe we should have inaudible . 
sanders look 
sanders . . . winning the praise of henry kissinger , i don't want henry kissinger's praise at all . 
o'malley i am the very first post 9 11 mayor and the very first post 9 11 governor . i understand , from the ground up , that when attacks like san bernardino happen , when attacks like the attacks of 9 11 happen , that when people call 911 , the first people to show up are the local first responders . many of the things secretary clinton said are absolutely true , but they underscore a lack of investment that we have , as a nation , failed to make over these last 15 years in intelligence gathering , intelligence analysis , intelligence sharing . not only in theater , in syria and iraq and other places where we embalk sic ourselves in toppling dictators without having any idea what comes next , but here in the homeland , as we protect people from this threat of the lone wolves and these changing tactics and strategies . i believe that what's happened here is that the president had us on the right course , but it's a lack of battle tempo . we have to increase the battle tempo , we have to bring a modern way of getting things done and forcing the sharing of information and do a much better job of acting on it in order to prevent these sorts of attacks in the future . 
clinton come on , i have stood on the debate stage . . . 
clinton well , again again , i absolutely agree with the diagnosis , the diagnosis that we've got to do much more to finish the work of getting universal health care coverage , something that i've worked on for 25 years . before there was something called obamacare , there was something called hillarycare . and we're now at 90 percent of coverage ; i'm going to get us to 100 percent . and with respect to college , i think we have to make college affordable . we are pricing out middle class , working , and poor families . there's no doubt about that . but i do think when you make proposals and you're running for president , you should be held accountable for whether or not the numbers add up and whether or not the plans . . . . . . are actually going to work . and just very briefly , on health care , most of the people who have analyzed what senator sanders put out remember , he had a plan for about , i don't know , 18 , 20 years . he changed in the middle of this campaign . he put out another plan . people have been analyzing the new plan . and there is no doubt by those who have analyzed it , progressive economists , health economists , and the like , that it would pose an incredible burden , not just on the budget , but on individuals . in fact , the washington post called it a train wreck for the poor . a working woman on medicaid who already has health insurance would be expected to pay about 2 , 300 . the same for free college . the free college offer you know , my late father said , if somebody promises you something for free , read the fine print . you read the fine print , and here's what it says . 
sanders no . what they would look , this is what i believe , jorge . this is the year 2016 . fifty years ago a high school degree got you a good job in the economy . today , in many respects , a college degree is the equivalent of a high school degree . we have got to go beyond first grade to 12th grade when we talk about public education . so i do believe we should make public colleges and universities tuition free , and i don't believe we should punish millions of young and not so young people with outrageous levels of student debt . 
sanders i want well trained , well paid , child care workers to give our youngest kids advance opportunities . 
sanders let me concur with the secretary , no question women's rights are under fierce attack all over this country . and i will tell you something that really galls me . i will not shock anybody to suggest that in politics there is occasionally a little bit of hypocrisy . just a little bit . all over this country we have republican candidates for president saying we hate the government . government is the enemy . we're going to cut social security to help you . we're going to cut medicare and medicaid , federal aid to education to help you , because the government is so terrible . but , by the way , when it comes to a woman having to make a very personal choice , ah , in that case , my republican colleagues love the government and want the government to make that choice for every woman in america . if that's not hypocrisy , i don't know what hypocrisy is . 
sanders you know ? the middle class anderson , and let me say something about the media , as well . i go around the country , talk to a whole lot of people . middle class in this country is collapsing . we have 27 million people living in poverty . we have massive wealth and income inequality . our trade policies have cost us millions of decent jobs . the american people want to know whether we're going to have a democracy or an oligarchy as a result of citizens union . enough of the e mails . let's talk about the real issues facing america . 
o'malley because we have found a way to reduce hospital costs , so whenever we come . . . 
sanders and i respectfully disagree with my friend over here . and that is , you are right . all of us have denounced trump's attempts to divide this country the anti latino rhetoric , the racist rhetoric , he anti muslim rhetoric . but where i disagree with you , governor o'malley , is i do believe we have to deal with the fundamental issues of a handful of billionaires . . . 
o'malley well , let's talk about this a little bit . one of the things that was not reported during that heartbreaking night of unrest in baltimore was that arrests had actually fallen to a 38 year low in the year prior to the freddie gray's tragic death . anderson , when i ran for mayor of baltimore back in 1999 , it was not because our city was doing well . it was because we allowed ourselves to become the most violent , addicted , and abandoned city in america . and i ran and promised people that together we could turn that around . and we put our city on a path to reduce violent crime , or part one ph crime by more than any other major city in america over the next 10 years . i did not make our city immune to setbacks . but i attended a lot of funerals , including one for a family of seven who were firebombed in their sleep for picking up the phone in a poor african american neighborhood and calling the police because of drug dealers on their corner . we've saved over a thousand lives in baltimore in the last 15 years of people working together . and the vast majority of them were young and poor and black . it wasn't easy on any day . but we saved lives and we gave our city a better future , improving police and community relations every single day that i was in office . 
sanders i'm one of the 77 percent . i think this is a very difficult issue . let me agree with much of what the secretary and the governor have said . let me tell you what i think we have got to do . i think it's a two pronged issue . number one , our goal is to crush and destroy isis . what is the best way to do it ? well , i think there are some differences of opinion here , perhaps between the secretary and myself . i voted against the war in iraq because i thought unilateral military action would not produce the results that were necessary and would lead to the kind of unraveling and instability that we saw in the middle east . i do not believe in unilateral american action . i believe in action in which we put together a strong coalition of forces , major powers and the muslim nations . i think one of the heroes in a real quagmire out there , in a dangerous and difficult world ; one of the heroes who we should recognize in the middle east is king abdullah ii of jordan . this small country has welcomed in many refugees . and abdullah said something recently , very important . he said , yes , international terrorism is by definition an international issue , but it is primarily an issue of the muslim nations who are fighting for the soul of islam . we the muslims should lead the effort on the ground . and i believe he is absolutely right . 
clinton all right . i have said from the very beginning that i supported the fight for 15 . i supported those on the front lines of the fight for it happens to be true . i also i supported the 15 effort in l . a . i supported in seattle . i supported it for the fast food workers in new york . the minimum wage at the national level right now is 7 . 25 , right ? we want to raise it higher than it ever has been , but we also have to recognize some states and some cities will go higher , and i support that . i have taken my cue from the democrats in the senate , led by senator patty murray and others , like my good friend kirsten gillibrand , who has said we will set a national level of 12 and then urge any place that can go above it to go above it . going from 7 . 25 to 12 is a huge difference . thirty five million people will get a raise . one in four working mothers will get a raise . i want to get something done . and i think setting the goal to get to 12 is the way to go , encouraging others to get to 15 . but , of course , if we have a democratic congress , we will go to 15 . 
clinton sorry . 
sanders i happen to think . . . 
sanders . . . maybe i'm a little bit confused . are you or are you not supporting legislation to lift the cap on taxable income and expand social security for 58 years and increase benefits . . . 
sanders well , i will tell you this . i believe and pope francis made this point . this is a moral issue . the scientists are telling us that we need to move extremely boldly . i am proud that , along with senator barbara boxer , a few years ago , we introduced the first piece of climate change legislation which called for a tax on carbon . and let me also tell you that nothing is gonna happen unless we are prepared to deal with campaign finance reform , because the fossil fuel industry is funding the republican party , which denies the reality of climate change . . . . . . and certainly is not prepared to go forward aggressively . this is a moral issue . we have got to be extremely aggressive in working with china , india , russia . 
o'malley . . . but will become american citizens . . . 
clinton well , that has not been a part of most of the proposals that i've seen . i'm interested in making sure we get the maximum amount of revenue from those who can well afford to provide it . so i'm going to come up with the best way forward . we're going to end up in the same place . we're going to get more revenue . i'm going to prioritize those recipients who need the most help first . 
clinton i did . if that's the way we're . . . 
o'malley yes , but senator you never came to campaign for vincent sheheen when he was running for governor . in fact , neither of you came to campaign for vincent sheheen when he was running for governor . we can talk all we want about wanting to build a stronger democratic party , but lester , the question you answered , it's no laughing matter . the most recurring question i get when i stand on the chair all across iowa and talk with my neighbors is , how are you going to heal the divisions and the wounds in our country ? this is the biggest challenge we face as a people . all my life , i brought people together over deep divides and very old wounds , and that's what we need now in a new leader . we cannot keep talking past each other , declaring all republicans are our enemies or the war is all about being against millionaires or billionaires , or it's all against american muslims , all against immigrants . look , as frederick douglas said , we are one , our cause is one , and we must help each other if we are going to succeed . 
clinton the fine print says this , that it will the federal government will cover two thirds of the cost and require the states , even those led by republican governors . . . 
clinton i will not . 
sanders all right . let's keep going . ok . 
sanders when the republicans when the republicans in the congress and some democrats were talking about cutting social security and benefits for disabled veterans , for the so called chained cpi , i founded a caucus called the defending social security caucus . my view is that when you have millions of seniors in this country trying to get by and i don't know how they do on 11 , 000 , 12 , 000 , 13 , 000 a year you don't cut social security , you expand it . and the way you expand it is by lifting the cap on taxable incomes so that you do away with the absurdity of a millionaire paying the same amount into the system as somebody making 118 , 000 . you do that , social security is solvent until 2061 and you can expand benefits . crosstalk 
o'malley because , martha , it would prevent people like the guy that just got charged yesterday perhaps from being able to buy combat assault weapons . you know , we are the only nation , only developed nation on the planet . . . 
webb and i put the african american soldier on the mall . i made that recommendation and fought for it . so , if you want someone who is can stand up in front of you right now and say i have done the hard job , i have taken the risks , i am your person . 
clinton well , i am in the middle , here , and . . . laughter lots of things coming from all directions . 
sanders let me just . . . 
o'malley may i jump in here for 30 seconds on health care ? 
sanders you know , ted kennedy was a very close friend of mine , and i served on the committee he chaired , the health , education , labor committee . and ted kennedy was kind enough to allow me to hold a hearing in 2008 , i believe , in congress , dealing with the plight of undocumented tomato pickers in immokalee , florida . and i went there on my own . wasn't an issue really for the state of vermont to expose the horrendous working conditions and the semi slavery , if you like , that those workers lived under . and the result of that hearing and the work that many , many people did was to significantly improve the wages and working conditions of those workers . 
sanders . . . yeah . . . 
clinton well , congratulations on your education . and also on your plans for the future . and here's what i will do . we're going to refinance everyone's existing student debt , 40 million americans have student debt . and right now , i go around asking people at my events if they know what their interest rate is and the interest rates literally go from like 8 percent to 14 percent . it's outrageous that at a time when interest rates have been historically low , people borrowing money to invest in their education are paying some of the highest interest rates around . and you can refinance your house to get a lower interest rate . you can refinance your car . corporations can refinance their debt . under my plan , you will be able to also lower your debt , move into a program to pay it back as a percentage of your income and more than that , my plan for debt free tuition at public colleges and universities will eventually eliminate any student debt . but for people who have it , i'm going to put a date certain that after a certain number of years , you no longer have to pay anything . the government has to quit making money off of lending money to young people to get their education . 
clinton . . . including detroit . 
clinton . . . 8 million kids . so i have a long history of getting things done , rooted in the same values . . . 
clinton let us talk about where we are in this race . i've gotten more votes than anybody running . 9 . 6 million at the last count . cheering and applause that is 2 . 3 million more than senator sanders . and it is 1 . 4 million more than donald trump . cheering and applause i think you have to look at the facts . and , the facts are that i'm putting together a very broad based , inclusive coalition from the south to the north , from the east to the west , with african american , latinos , women , union households , working people and i am very proud of the campaign we are running . it is a campaign that will not only capture the democratic nomination , but a campaign that will defeat whoever the republican end up nominating . cheering and applause 
clinton let me let me respond again because the misrepresentation can't go unanswered here . first of all , that is something that is not fair about what i said . i did say we needed to be very concerned about little children coming to this country on their own , very often many of them not making it . and when they got here , they needed , as i have argued for , legal counsel , due process , to make a decision . we need to end private detention , we need to end family detention . and in 2006 , when senator sanders was running for the senate from vermont , he voted in the house with hard line republicans for indefinite detention for undocumented immigrants , and then he sided with those republicans to stand with vigilantes known as minute men who were taking up outposts along the border to hunt down immigrants . so i think when you were running for the senate , you made it clear by your vote , senator , that you were going to stand with the republicans . when you got to the senate in 2007 , one of the first things you did was vote against ted kennedy's immigration reform which he'd been working on for years before you ever arrived . 
sanders well , i think he's already regretting what he did in crimea and what he is doing in the ukraine . i think he is really regretting the decline of his economy . and i think what he is trying to do now is save some face . but i think when russians get killed in syria and when he gets bogged down , i think the russian people are going to give him a message that maybe they should come home , maybe they should start working with the united states to rectify the situation now . 
clinton ok , so . . . 
sanders sure . i agree . . . i agree with everything the secretary said , but let me just add this , there is a responsibility on the part of the pharmaceutical industry and the drug companies who are producing all of these drugs and not looking at the consequence of it . and second of all , when we talk about addiction being a disease , the secretary is right , what that means is we need a revolution in this country in terms of mental health treatment . people should be able to get the treatment that they need when they need it , not two months from now , which is why i believe in universal . . . 
sanders . . . we have documented , unlike secretary clinton , i have documented exactly how i would pay for our ambitious agenda . 
clinton and hold them accountable as well . 
sanders yes . 
clinton well , i wanted to say , and i'll do it quickly , i was very pleased that leaders of president obama's administration went out to silicon valley last week and began exactly this conversation about what we can do , consistent with privacy and security . we need better intelligence cooperation , we need to be sure that we are getting the best intelligence that we can from friends and allies around the world . and then , we've got to recognize our first line of defense against lone wolf attacks is among muslim americans . and it is not only shameful , it is dangerous for the kinds of comments you're hearing from the republican side . we need to be reaching out and unifying our country against terrorist attacks and lone wolves , and working with muslim americans . 
clinton well , i just want to quickly add . . . 
sanders let me just say this . wall street is perhaps the most powerful economic and political force in this country . you have companies like goldman sachs , who just recently paid a settlement fine with the federal government for 5 billion for defrauding investors . goldman sachs was one of those companies whose illegal activity helped destroy our economy and ruin the lives of millions of americans . but this is what a rigged economy and a corrupt campaign finance system and a broken criminal justice is about . these guys are so powerful that not one of the executives on wall street has been charged with anything after paying , in this case of goldman sachs , a 5 billion fine . kid gets caught with marijuana , that kid has a police record . a wall street executive destroys the economy , 5 billion settlement with the government , no criminal record . that is what power is about . that is what corruption is about . and that is what has to change in the united states of america . crosstalk 
clinton . . . and , our president led the effort to protect our world and he deserve our appreciation , not our criticism . . . 
o'malley well , we have invested nowhere near what we should be investing in human intelligence on the ground . and what i'm talking about is not only the covert cia intelligence ; i'm also talking about diplomatic intelligence . i mean , we've seen time and time again , especially in this very troubled region of nation state failures , and then we have no idea who the next generation of leaders are that are coming forward . so what i would say is not only do we need to be thinking in military terms , but we do our military a disservice when we don't greatly dial up the investment that we are making in diplomacy and human intelligence and when we fail to dial up properly , the role of sustainable development in all of this . as president , i would make the administrator of usaid an actual cabinet member . we have to act in a much more whole of government approach , as general dempsey said . and i do believe , and i would disagree somewhat with one of my colleagues , this is a genocidal threat . they have now created a safe haven in the vacuum that we allowed to be partly and because of our blunders , to be created to be created in the areas of syria and iraq . we cannot allow safe havens , and as a leader of moral nations around this earth , we need to come up with new alliances and new ways to prepare for these new sorts of threats , because martha , this will not be the last region where nation states fail . and you've seen a little bit of this emerging in the in the african union and the things that they have done to better stabilize somalia . we need to pay attention here in central america as well . so this is the new type of threats that we're facing and we need to lead as a nation in confronting it and putting together new alliances and new coalitions . 
o'malley when you come back to me , i'll share that story . 
sanders lead the world . 
clinton well , but all well , on a state level , a state as big as many countries in the world . and it has not had the ill effects that the republicans are always saying it will have . and i think this is this is typical republican scare tactics . we can design a system and pay for it that does not put the burden on small businesses . i remember as a young mother , you know , having a baby wake up who was sick and i'm supposed to be in court , because i was practicing law . i know what it's like . and i think we need to recognize the incredible challenges that so many parents face , particularly working moms . i see my good friend , senator gillibrand , in the front row . she's been a champion of this . we need to get a consensus through this campaign , which is why i'm talking about it everywhere i go , and we need to join the rest of the advanced world in having it . 
sanders i amwill absolutely admit that secretary clinton has the support of far more governors , mayors , members of the house . she has the entire establishment or almost the entire establishment behind her . that's a fact . i don't deny it . but i am pretty proud that we have over a million people who have contributed to our campaign averaging 27 bucks apiece . that we have had meetings where 25 , 000 30 , 000 people have come out . that our campaign is a campaign of the people , by the people , and for the people . so , rachel , yes , secretary clinton does represent the establishment . i represent , i hope , ordinary americans , and by the way , who are not all that enamored with the establishment , but i am very proud to have people like keith ellison and raul grijalva in the house , the co chairmen of the house progressive caucus . 
sanders . . . well , i look . . . 
sanders could i just say just say this . . . 
sanders my answer my answer is a lot shorter . no , i do not support fracking . and by the way by the way , anderson , i'm glad you raised the issue of climate change , because the media doesn't talk enough about what the scientists are telling us , and that is , if we don't get our act together . . . . . . the planet that we're gonna leave our children may not be healthy and habitable . i have introduced the most comprehensive climate change legislation in the history of the senate , which , among other things , calls for a tax on carbon , massive investments . . . . . . in energy efficiency , wind , solar and other sustainable energy . 
o'malley anderson , the point that the black lives matter movement is making is a very , very legitimate and serious point , and that is that as a nation we have undervalued the lives of black lives , people of color . when i ran for mayor of baltimore and we we burying over 350 young men ever single year , mostly young , and poor , and black , and i said to our legislature , at the time when i appeared in front of them as a mayor , that if we were burying white , young , poor men in these number we would be marching in the streets and there would be a different reaction . black lives matter , and we have a lot of work to do to reform our criminal justice system , and to address race relations in our country . 
sanders absolutely right . 
clinton thank you . thank you very much . 
clinton . . . but the fact is he did . and that contributed to the collapse of lehman brothers and started the cascade . . . crosstalk 
clinton i have said yes , we are going to pick the best way or combination . . . 
clinton and i do think that the bilateral agreement that president obama made with the chinese was significant . now , it needs to go further , and there will be an international meeting at the end of this year , and we must get verifiable commitments to fight climate change from every country gathered there . 
clinton and the best way to do that is to go right at the people . . . 
clinton i strongly support the president's executive actions . i hope the supreme court upholds them . i think there is constitutional and legal authority for the president to have done what he did . i am against the raids . i'm against the kind of inhumane treatment that is now being visited upon families , waking them up in the middle of the night , rounding them up . we should be deporting criminals , not hardworking immigrant families who do the very best they can and often are keeping economies going in many places in our country . i'm a strong supporter of comprehensive immigration reform . have been ever since i was in the senate . i was one of the original sponsors of the dream act . i voted for comprehensive immigration reform in 2007 . senator sanders voted against it at that time . because i think we have to get to comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship . and as president i would expand enormous energy , literally call every member of congress that i thought i could persuade . hopefully after the 2016 election , some of the republicans will come to their senses and realize we are not going to deport 11 or 12 million people in this country . and they will work with me to get comprehensive immigration reform . 
clinton martha , that you know , one of the reasons why i have advocated for a no fly zone is in order to create those safe refuges within syria , to try to protect people on the ground both from assad's forces , who are continuing to drop barrel bombs , and from isis . and of course , it has to be de conflicted with the russians , who are also flying in that space . i'm hoping that because of the very recent announcement of the agreement at the security council , which embodies actually an agreement that i negotiated back in geneva in june of 2012 , we're going to get a diplomatic effort in syria to begin to try to make a transition . a no fly zone would prevent the outflow of refugees and give us a chance to have some safe spaces . 
sanders when you talk about the long term consequences of war , let's talk about the men and women who came home from war . the 500 , 000 who came home with ptsd , and traumatic brain injury . and i would hope in the midst of all of this discussion , this country makes certain that we do not turn our backs on the men and women who put their lives on the line to defend us , and that we stand with them as they have stood with us . 
sanders no , not at all . here's the reality of american economic life today . the reality is that we have one of lowest voter turnouts of any major country on earth because so many people have given up on the political process . the reality is that there has been trillions of dollars of wealth going from the middle class in the last 30 years to the top 1 10th of 1 percent . the reality is we that have a corrupt campaign finance system which separates the american people's needs and desires from what congress is doing . so to my mind , what we have got to do is wage a political revolution where millions of people have given up on the political process , stand up and fight back , demand the government that represents us and not just a handful of campaign contributioncontributors . now all of the ideas that i'm talking about , they are not radical ideas . making public colleges and universities tuition free , that exists in countries all over the world , used to exist in the united states . rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure , and creating 13 million jobs by doing away with tax loopholes that large corporations now enjoy by putting their money into the cayman islands and other tax havens . that is not a radical idea . what we need to do is to stand up to the big money interests , and the campaign contributors . when we do that , we can , in fact , transform america . 
sanders of course not . there was a piece of legislation supported by dozens and dozens of members of the house which codified existing legislation . what the secretary is doing tonight and has done very often is take large pieces of legislation and take pieces out of it . no , i did not oppose the bailout or the support of the automobile industry . no , i do not support vigilantes , and that is a horrific statement , an unfair statement to make . i will stand inaudible of my career , political career fighting for workers , fighting for the poorest people in this country . madame secretary , i will match my record against yours any day of the week . 
o'malley i would want us to take our place among the nations of the world to alleviate this sort of death and the specter we saw of little kids' bodies washing up on a beach . 
sanders second of all second of all , if i might , in terms of syria , in terms of syria . . . 
sanders well , let me just respond . i worked with ted kennedy . he was the chairman of my committee . and i loved ted kennedy . but on this issue , when you have one of the large latino organizations in america saying vote no , and you have the afl cio saying vote no , and you have leading progressive democrats , in fact , voting no , i don't apologize for that vote . but in terms of the children , i don't know to whom you're sending a message . who are you sending a message to ? these are children who are leaving countries and neighborhoods where their lives are at stake . that was the fact . i don't think we use them to send a message . i think we welcome them into this country and do the best we can to help them get their lives together . 
clinton and i think we have an opportunity here and i know that inside the administration this is being hotly debated to get that leverage to try to get the russians to have to deal with everybody in the region and begin to move toward a political , diplomatic solution in syria . 
clinton so i think it's time to end the very artful smear that you and your campaign have been carrying out . . . 
sanders nothing that secretary clinton said do i disagree with . this mandatory sentencing , a very bad idea . it takes away discretion from judges . we have got to demilitarize local police departments so they do not look like occupying armies . we have got to make sure that local police departments look like the communities they serve in their diversity . and , where we are failing abysmally is in the very high rate of recidivism we see . people are being released from jail without the education , without the job training , without the resources that they need to get their lives together , then they end up we're shocked that they end up back in jail again . so , we have a lot of work to do . but , here is a pledge i've made throughout this campaign , and it's really not a very radical pledge . when we have more people in jail , disproportionately african american and latino , than china does , a communist authoritarian society four times our size . here's my promise , at the end of my first term as president we will not have more people in jail than any other country . we will invest in education , and jobs for our kids , not incarceration and more jails . 
sanders according to the new york times . . . . . . . for president obama , this was a pretty tough call , like a 51 49 call , do you overthrow qadafi , who , of course , was a horrific dictator ? the new york times told us it was secretary clinton who led the effect for that regime change . and this is the same type of mentality that supported the war in iraq . look . . . . . . qadafi , saddam hussein are brutal , brutal murdering thugs . no debate about that . but what we have got to do and what the president was saying is we didn't think thoroughly about what happens the day after you get rid of these dictators . regime change often has unintended consequences in iraq and in libya right now , where isis has a very dangerous foothold . and i think if you studied the whole history of . . . 
sanders . . . is kind of naive . 
o'malley martha , if i may . . . 
sanders yes . 
clinton to tackle systemic racism and divert people in the beginning . 
clinton . . . we're going to get rid of it . 
clinton karen , i'm going to follow my friend senator sanders model here . if i'm so fortunate enough to be the democratic nominee , there will be a lot of time to talk about him . i was the first one to call him out . i called him out when he was calling mexicans rapists . when he was engaging in rhetoric that i found deeply offensive . i said basta , and i am pleased that others . . . . . . others are also joining in making clear that his rhetoric , his demagoguery , his trafficking in prejudice and paranoia has no place in our political system . especially from somebody running for president who couldn't decide whether or not to disavow the ku klux klan and david duke . so people can draw their own conclusions about him . i will just end by saying this . you don't make america great by getting rid of everything that made america great . 
chafee the party left me . there's no doubt about that . there was no room for a liberal moderate republican in that party . i even had a primary for my reelection in 2006 . i won it . but the money poured in to defeat me in rhode island as a republican . that's what we were up against . 
sanders i believe that the recklessness , the greed , and the illegal behavior of wall street drove this country into the worst economic downturn in the history of the united modern history of the united states of america . and i will be damned if it was the working people of this country who had to bail out the crooks on wall street . and what i proposed and i had an amendment that was defeated it was defeated by a voice vote on the floor of the senate that said to those people on the top who benefited from wall street greed i said , you pay for the bailout . don't go to my constituents , who are struggling to make ends meet . in terms of the auto bailout , of course that made sense . in terms of the stimulus package , of course that made sense , and i strongly supported president obama's position on that . but let us be clear , one of the major issues secretary clinton says i'm a one issue person , well , i guess so . my one issue is trying to rebuild a disappearing middle class . that's my one issue . 
clinton no , it would have to go through the congress , and i know the white house has actually been working with members of congress . maybe now we can get it moving again so that we can upgrade it so that it does include all the tools and everything in our arsenal that we can use to try to work with our allies and our friends , come up with better intelligence . you know , it is difficult finding intelligence that is actionable in a lot of these places , but we have to keep trying . and we have to do more to prevent the flood of foreign fighters that have gone to syria , especially the ones with western passports , that come back . so there's a lot of work we need to do and i want to be sure what's called the aumf , has the authority that is needed going forward . 
o'malley . . . anderson , when the nra wrote to everyone in our state when the nra wrote to members in our state and told people with hunting traditions lies about what our comprehensive gun safety legislation is , i wrote right back to them and laid out what it actually did . and that's why , not only did we pass it , but the nra didn't . . . 
sanders 
clinton yes , and it was the same one that president obama made . because i don't think we should be imposing new big programs that are going to raise middle class families' taxes . we just heard that most families haven't had a wage increase since 2001 . since , you know , the end of the last clinton administration when incomes did go up for everybody . and we've got to get back to where people can save money again , where they can invest in their families , and i don't think a middle class tax should be part of anybody's plan right now . 
sanders ok . first of all . . . 
clinton i'm a progressive . but i'm a progressive who likes to get things done . and i know . . . . . . how to find common ground , and i know how to stand my ground , and i have proved that in every position that i've had , even dealing with republicans who never had a good word to say about me , honestly . but we found ways to work together on everything from . . . 
sanders what our campaign is about , is asking people to think big not small . and when we think big and we talk about education , we've got to ask ourselves a simple question , how is it starting at college that hundreds of thousands of bright young people are today , unable to go to college because they can't afford it ? how is it that maybe your kid and when i was growing up , we didn't have any money we're not even dreaming about going to college because they knew it was another world . so starting with the top , now i know some people think it's a radical idea , i don't . i believe that every public college and university in this country should be tuition free . so that your child regardless of the income of your family knows that if she's studies hard , she is going to be able to go to college . and you know what else we do ? we invest in child care . right now , you've got child care workers making mcdonald's wages , that is crazy . 
sanders inaudible . 
sanders first of all , the word contempt is not right . there are some great businesses who treat their workers and the environment with respect . verizon happens not to be one of them . and what we need to do is to tell this guy immelt , who's the head of general electric , he doesn't like me , well , that's fine . he has outsourced hundreds of thousands of decent paying jobs throughout the world . . . . . . cut his workforce here substantially and in a given year , by the way , it turns out that both verizon and general electric , in a given year , pay nothing in federal income tax despite making billions in profits . booing 
sanders let me just say this . i don't think that the secretary fully answered your question , and i think the proof may be in the pudding . honduras and that region of the world may be the most violent region in our hemisphere . gang lords , vicious people torturing people , doing horrible things to families . children fled that part of the world to try , try , try , try , maybe , to meet up with their family members in this country , taking a route that was horrific , trying to start a new life . secretary clinton did not support those children coming into this country . i did . now i happen to agree with president obama on many , many issues . i think he has done a great job as president of the united states . he is wrong on this issue of deportation . i disagree with him on that . so to answer your question , no , i will not deport children from the united states of america . 
clinton i'm running because i have a lifetime of experience in getting results and fighting for people , fighting for kids , for women , for families , fighting to even the odds . and i know what it takes to get things done . i know how to find common ground and i know how to stand my ground . and i think we're going to need both of those in washington to get anything that we're talking about up here accomplished . so i'm very happy that i have both the commitment of a lifetime and the experience of a lifetime to bring together to offer the american people . 
sanders that's a good point , anderson . listen , i suppose they can trust the corporations who have destroyed flint by a disastrous trade policy which have allowed them to shut down plants in flint and move to china or mexico . we could trust them i'm sure . or maybe you know , maybe , anderson , tell you what we should maybe we should let wall street come in and run the city of flint . . . . . . because we know their honesty and integrity has done so much for the american people . look , we live in a democracy , and i'm not in the last person to deny that government is failing in many respects . but at the end of the day , i will trust the people to create a government that works for them , rather than wall street or corporate america . 
sanders . . . many of whom previously had given up . 
clinton well , you know , governor , i know that when you had a chance to appoint a commissioner for financial regulation , you chose an investment banker in 2010 . so for me , it is looking at what works and what we need to do to try to move past what happened in '08 . and i will go back and say again , aig was not a big bank . it had to be bailed out and it nearly destroyed us . lehman brothers was not a big bank . it was an investment bank . and its bankruptcy and its failure nearly destroyed us . so i've said , if the big banks don't play by the rules , i will break them up . 
sanders and i understand in many universities a heck of a lot of vice presidents who earn a big salary . but , bottom line is this is the year 2015 . if we are going to be competitive in the global economy we need the best educated workforce . it is insane to my mind , hundreds of thousands of young people today , bright qualified people , cannot go to college because they cannot afford their families cannot afford to send them . millions coming out of school as you indicated , deeply in debt . what do we do ? my proposal is to put a speculation tax on wall street , raise very substantial sums of money , not only make public colleges and universities tuition free , but also substantially lower interest rates on student debt . you have families out there paying 6 percent , 8 percent , 10 percent on student debt ; refinance their homes at 3 percent . what sense is that ? so i think we need radical changes in the funding of higher education . we should look at college today the way high school was looked at 60 years ago . all young people who have the ability should be able to get a college education . 
clinton . . . if i could , you know , in the very first debate i was asked am i a moderate or a progressive and i said i'm a progressive who likes to get things done . cherry picking a quote here or there doesn't change my record of having fought for racial justice , having fought for kids rights , having fought the kind of inequities that fueled my interest in service in the first place going back to my days in the children's defense fund . it certainly didn't stop me from taking on the drug companies and the insurance companies . before it was called hillarycarei mean , before it was called obamacare it was called hillarycare because we took them on , and we weren't successful , but we kept fighting and we got the children's health insurance program . every step along the way i have stood up , and fought , and have the scars to prove it . so , again . . . . . . i think it's important that , look , i understand senator sanders really trying to distinguish himself . i understand that , that's what you do in campaigns , but at the same time let's not bein , i think an unfair way , making an accusation , or making an attack about where i stand and about where i've always stood . it is fair to say , senator , that in your definition , as you being the self proclaimed gatekeeper for progressivism , i don't know anyone else who fits that definition , but i know a lot of really hard fighting progressives in the democratic party who have stood up time , and time again against special interests , against the powerful on behalf of those who are left behind and left out . and , that's what we ought to be celebrating . let's talk about what we would do as president , and commander in chief to make sure the progress continues into the future . 
sanders . . . campaign of challenging , if i hear you correctly , madam secretary , you are now coming out finally in favor of lifting the cap on taxable income . . . . . . and extending and expanding social security . if that is the case , welcome on board . i'm glad you're here . 
clinton part of diplomacy , the hard work of diplomacy is trying to extract whatever concessions you can get , and giving something the other side wants . of course you've got to try to make peace with , and work with those who are your adversaries , but you don't just rush in , open the door , and say , here i am . let's talk and make a deal . that's not the way it works . 
o'malley . . . because we built a public consensus . . . 
sanders no , it is not breaking my word . when you are it's one thing to say i'm raising taxes , it's another thing to say that we are doing away with private health insurance premiums . so , if i save you 10 , 000 in private health insurance , and you pay a little bit more in taxes in total , there are huge savings in what your family is spending . 
clinton i would work quickly to present to the congress my plans for creating more good jobs in manufacturing , infrastructure , clean and renewable energy , raising the minimum wage , and guaranteeing , finally , equal pay for women's work . i would also . . . . . . i would also be presenting my plans to build on the affordable care act and to improve it by decreasing the out of pocket costs by putting a cap on prescription drug costs ; by looking for ways that we can put the prescription drug business and the health insurance company business on a more stable platform that doesn't take too much money out of the pockets of hard working americans . and third , i would be working , in every way that i knew , to bring our country together . we do have too much division , too much mean spiritedness . there's a lot we have to do on immigration reform , on voting rights , on campaign finance reform , but we need to do it together . that's how we'll have the kind of country for the 21st century that we know will guarantee our children and grandchildren the kind of future they deserve . 
sanders i am feeling exactly the way i felt at the first debate . there's a process under way . i will not politicize it . 
clinton . . . let's do it . 
clinton 
o'malley i agree . 
clinton i'm running for president to knock down all the barriers that are holding americans back , and to rebuild the ladders of opportunity that will give every american a chance to advance , especially those who have been left out and left behind . i know a lot of americans are angry about the economy . and for good cause . americans haven't had a raise in 15 years . there aren't enough good paying jobs , especially for young people . and yes , the economy is rigged in favor of those at the top . we both agree that we have to get unaccountable money out of our political system and that we have to do much more to ensure that wall street never wrecks main street again . but i want to go further . i want to tackle those barriers that stand in the way of too many americans right now . african americans who face discrimination in the job market , education , housing , and the criminal justice system . hardworking immigrant families living in fear , who should be brought out of the shadows so they and their children can have a better future . guaranteeing that women's work finally gets the pay , the equal pay that we deserve . i think america can only live up to its potential when we make sure that every american has a chance to live up to his or her potential . that will be my mission as president . and i think together we will make progress . 
clinton well , i agree that we have to have the toughest screening and vetting . . . 
webb there is a reality that i think we all need to recognize with respect to the power of the financial sector . and let me just go back a minute and say that on this tarp program , i introduced a piece of legislation calling for a windfall profits tax on the executives of any of these companies that got more than 5 billion , that it was time for them , once they got their compensation and their bonus , to split the rest of the money they made with the nurses and the truck drivers and the soldiers who bailed them out . with respect to the financial sector , i mean , i know that my time has run out but in speaking of changing positions and the position on how this debate has occurred is kind of frustrating because unless somebody mentions my name i can't get into the discussion . 
clinton thank you . 
clinton i support our continuing involvement in nato . and it is important to ask for our nato allies to pay more of the cost . there is a requirement that they should be doing so , and i believe that needs to be enforced . but there's a larger question here . nato has been the most successful military alliance in probably human history . it has bound together across the atlantic countries that are democracies , that have many of the same values and interests , and now we need to modernize it and move it into the 21st century to serve as that head of our defense operations in europe when it comes to terrorism and other threats that we face . so . . . 
clinton . . . let me say this . . . . . . we are going to extend the social security trust fund . we've got some good ideas to do it . let's get a congress elected . . . 
clinton well , i support what president obama is doing . he called for and got accountability from the officials at the epa to make sure the state is doing its job . he expanded medicaid for helping kids particularly to get the health care they need . he is also ordered that there be a head start program . i support that . when it comes to the water itself , we are supporting a program that mayor waver announced through flint waterworks to pay people in flint , not outsiders , but people here to deliver the water while we are fixing the pipes . i would do even more of that . as president , what we were able to put together was a beginning . as president , i would concentrate resources on the city for economic development for more jobs as we fix the water and provide the health and education , interventions that children need . 
clinton well , let me address college affordability , because i have a plan that i think will really zero in on what the problems are . first , all the 40 million americans who currently have student debt will be able to refinance their debt to a low interest rate . that will save thousands of dollars for people who are now struggling under this cumbersome , burdensome college debt . as a young student in nevada said to me , the hardest thing about going to college should not be paying for it . so then we have to make it more affordable . how do we make it more affordable ? my plan would enable anyone to go to a public college or university tuition free . you would not have to borrow money for tuition . but i do believe and maybe it's because i worked when i went through college ; i worked when i went through law school i think it's important for everybody to have some part of getting this accomplished . that's why i call it a compact . 
chafee i think you're being a little rough . i'd just arrived at the united states senate . i'd been mayor of my city . my dad had died . i'd been appointed by the governor . it was the first vote and it was 90 5 , because it was a conference report . but let me just say about income inequality . we've had a lot of talk over the last few minutes , hours , or tens of minutes , but no one is saying how we're going to fix it . and it all started with the bush tax cuts that favored the wealthy . so let's go back to the tax code . and 0 . 6 percent of americans are at the top echelon , over 464 , 000 , 0 . 6 americans . that's less than 1 percent . but they generate 30 percent of the revenue . and they're doing fine . 
sanders . . . may i please . . . 
sanders . . . inaudible . . . 
clinton well , there's always a retrospective to say what mistakes were made . but i know that we offered a lot of help and i know it was difficult for the libyans to accept help . what we could have done if they had said yes would have been a lot more than what we were able to have done . 
sanders secretary clinton is right . this is a complicated issue . i don't think anyone has a magical solution . but this is what i do believe . yes , of course assad is a terrible dictator . but i think we have got to get our foreign policies and priorities right . the immediate it is not assad who is attacking the united states . it is isis . and isis is attacking france and attacking russian airliners . the major priority , right now , in terms of our foreign and military policy should be the destruction of isis . and i think and i think we bring together that broad coalition , including russia , to help us destroy isis . and work on a timetable to get rid of assad , hopefully through democratic elections . first priority , destroy isis . 
o'malley i agree with that . 
sanders the scientific community is telling us that if we do not address the global crisis of climate change , transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to sustainable energy , the planet that we're going to be leaving our kids and our grandchildren may well not be habitable . that is a major crisis . 
sanders what i have said , is that gun manufacturer's liability bill has some good provisions among other things , we've prohibited ammunition that would've killed cops who had protection on . we have child safety protection work on guns in that legislation . and what we also said , is a small mom and pop gun shop who sells a gun legally to somebody should not be held liable if somebody does something terrible with that gun . so what i said is , i would re look at it . we are going to re look at it and i will support stronger provisions . 
sanders well , i remember that meeting very well . i remember it like it was yesterday . hank paulson , bernanke came in , and they say , guys , the economy is going to collapse because wall street is going under . it's gonna take the economy with them . and you know what i said to hank paulson ? i said , hank , your guys you come from goldman sachs . your millionaire and billionaire friends caused this problem . how about your millionaire and billionaire friends paying for the bailout , not working families in this country ? so to answer your question , no , i would not have let the economy collapse . but it was wrong to ask the middle class to bail out wall street . and by the way , i want wall street now to help kids in this country go to college , public colleges and universities , free with a wall street speculation tax . 
clinton you know . . . 
clinton i don't have any comment . i don't know that . i don't believe that there is any reason to be concerned about it . i admire what senator sanders has accomplished in his campaign . i have more than 850 , 000 donors , most of them give less than 100 . i am very proud of that . and i just want to make one point . you know , we have our differences . and we get into vigorous debate about issues , but compare the substance of this debate with what you saw on the republican stage last week . 
clinton so i'm with both senator sanders and governor o'malley in putting a lot of attention onto the banks . and the plan that i have put forward would actually empower regulators to break up big banks if we thought they posed a risk . but i want to make sure we're going to cover everybody , not what caused the problem last time , but what could cause it next time . crosstalk 
clinton well , that isn't . . . 
sanders well , let us level with the american people . secretary clinton has been going around the country saying bernie sanders wants to dismantle the affordable care act , people are going to lose their medicaid , they're going to lose their chip program . i have fought my entire life to make sure that healthcare is a right for all people . we're not going to dismantle everything . but , here is the truth . twenty nine million people have no health insurance today in america . we pay , by far , the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs . one out of five americans can't even afford the prescriptions their doctors are writing . millions of people have high deductibles and co payments . what i said , and let me repeat it , i don't know what economists secretary clinton is talking to , but what i have said , and let me repeat it , that yes , the middle the family right in the middle of the economy would pay 500 dollars more in taxes , and get a reduction in their healthcare costs of 5 , 000 dollars . in my view healthcare is a right of all people , not a privilege , and i will fight for that . 
sanders then why did she put out that statement ? 
clinton you know , i completely agree with senator sanders . the first speech i gave in this campaign back in april was about criminal justice reform and ending the era of mass incarceration . the statistics from wisconsin are particularly troubling , because it is the highest rate of incarceration for african americans in our nation , twice the national average . and we know of the tragic , terrible event that lead to the death of dontre hamilton right here in milwaukee , a young man unarmed , who should still be with us . his family certainly believes that . and so do i . so we have work to do . there have been some good recommendations about what needs to happen . president obama's policing commission came out with some . i have fully endorsed those . but we have to restore policing that will actually protect the communities that police officers are sworn to protect . and , then we have to go after sentencing , and that's one of the problems here in wisconsin because so much of what happened in the criminal justice system doesn't happen at the federal level , it happens at the state and local level . but , i would also add this . there are other racial discrepancies . really systemic racism in this state , as in others , education , in employment , in the kinds of factors that too often lead from a position where young people , particularly young men , are pushed out of school early , are denied employment opportunities . so , when we talk about criminal justice reform , and ending the era of mass incarceration , we also have to talk about jobs , education , housing , and other ways of helping communities . 
sanders that's right . so , let's start off with the basic premise . a few days ago goldman sachs formally reached a settlement with the united states government for 5 billion dollars . what goldman sachs acknowledged was , essentially , that they were selling fraudulent packages of subprime mortgage loans . goldman sachs was not the only bank , other banks , of course , did the same . now , i don't need dodd frank now to tell me that we have got to break up these banks , a , because they're based on fraudulent principles , and b , because when you have six financial institutions that have assets equivalent to 58 of the gfp of this country , they are just too big , too much concentration of wealth and power . 
clinton well , that's going to be up to the legal system , don . i mean , i can't standing here i don't have all the facts , but people should be held accountable wherever that leads . if it leads to resignation , or recall if you're in political office . if it leads to civil penalties , if it leads to criminal responsibility . there has to be an absolute accountability , and i will support whatever the outcome of those investigations are . 
chafee well , we just heard senator sanders say that it's the worst decision in american history . that's very significant , the worst decision in american history , i just heard from senator sanders . so , as we look ahead , if you're going to make those poor judgment calls , a critical time in our history , we just finished with the vietnam era , getting back into another quagmire if you're looking ahead , and you're looking at someone who made that poor decision in 2002 to go into iraq when there was no real evidence of weapons of mass destruction in iraq i know because i did my homework , and , so , that's an indication of how someone will perform in the future . and that's what's important . 
clinton thank you . me , too . me , too . 
sanders and by the wayand by the way , if i may , the secretary probably doesn't know that there's not a day that goes by when i am not asked to attack her on that issue , and i have refrained from doing that and i will continue to refrain from doing that . 
sanders black lives matter . cheering and the reason the reason those words matter is the african american community knows that on any given day some innocent person like sandra bland can get into a car , and then three days later she's going to end up dead in jail , or their kids . . . . . . are going to get shot . we need to combat institutional racism from top to bottom , and we need major , major reforms in a broken criminal justice system . . . . . . in which we have more people in jail than china . and , i intended to tackle that issue . to make sure that our people have education and jobs rather than jail cells . 
sanders no , i do not propose free college tuition , i proposed free tuition at public colleges and universities . yes i did . 
clinton everybody should . laughter and applause look , i have said i want to be the president for the struggling , the striving and the successful . i want to make sure the wealthy pay their fair share , which they have not been doing . i want the buffett rule to be in effect , where millionaires have to pay 30 percent tax rates instead of 10 percent to nothing in some cases . i want to make sure we rein in the excessive use of political power to feather the nest and support the super wealthy . but i also want to create jobs and i want to be a partner with the private sector . i'm particularly keen on creating jobs in small business . my dad was a small businessman , a really small business . i want to do more to help incentivize and create more small businesses . so if if people who are in the private sector know what i stand for , it's what i fought for as a senator , it's what i will do as president , and they want to be part of once again building our economy so it works for everybody , more power to them , because they are the kind of business leaders who understand that if we don't get the american economy moving and growing , we're not going to recognize our country and we're not going to give our kids the same opportunities that we had . 
clinton i can only tell you what i believe , and that is that i am the strongest candidate to take it to the republicans and win in november . and i say that with greatwith great respect for the campaign that senator sanders has been running . i personally am thrilled at the numbers of people , and particularly young people who are coming to support your campaign . i hope that i will be able to earn their support . they may not support me now , but i support them and we'll work together . but what i'm concerned about is the views of many democrats who know their states , who know how hard it is to win a general election . and it also will push whoever the nominee is into the spotlight . i've been vetted . there's hardly anything you don't know about me . and i think it's fair to say that whoever is in that position , senator sanders or anyone else who might have run , will face the most withering onslaught . so , i think that i am the person who can do all aspects of the job . i think i'm the person best prepared to take the case to the republicans . and i think that at the end of the day , it's not so much electability . it is who the american people can believe can keep them safe , can get the economy moving again , can get incomes rising , can build on the progressive accomplishments of president obama . and i think that the coalition that president obama put together to win twice is a coalition that i can put together and add to . and that's what i'm prepared to . . . crosstalk 
sanders yes . 
clinton there was also in that a reference to the security council , and i know you're not shy when you oppose something , senator . so , yes , it was unanimous . that's exactly right , including you . and what we did was to try to provide support for our european and arab allies and partners . the decision was the president's . did i do the due diligence ? did i talk to everybody i could talk to ? did i visit every capital and then report back to the president ? yes , i did . that's what a secretary of state does . but at the end of the day , those are the decisions that are made by the president to in any way use american military power . and the president made that decision . and , yes , we did try without success because of the libyans' obstruction to our efforts , but we did try and we will continue to try to help the libyan people . 
clinton well , i have actually documented every way that i'm going to pay for what i'm doing because i think the american public deserves to know . and , you can go to my website and actually see that . but , there are serious questions about how we're going to pay for what we want to see our country do . and , i'm the only candidate standing here tonight who has said i will not raise taxes on the middle class . i want to raise incomes , not taxes , and i'm going to do everything i can to make sure that the wealthy pay for debt free tuition , for child care , for paid family leave . to help us bring down student debt we're going to refinance that student debt , saving kids thousands of dollars . yeah , and that will also come out of the some of the pockets of people in the financial services industry . . . 
o'malley senator , it is not about rural senator , it was not about rural and urban . 
sanders 
clinton and my approach i think is going to get us there faster without tying us up into political knots with a congress that still would not support what you are proposing . 
sanders all right . let me respond to this . 
clinton well you know , rachel , i think i may not have done the job i should in explaining my record . you know , i didwhen i left the secretary of state's office , like so many former officials , military leaders , journalists , others , i did go on the speaking circuit . i spoke to heart doctors , i spoke to the american camping association , i spoke to auto dealers , and yes , i spoke to firms on wall street . they wanted me to talk about the world , what my experience had been as secretary of state . but what i want people to know is i went to wall street before the crash . i was the one saying you're going to wreck the economy because of these shenanigans with mortgages . i called to end the carried interest loophole that hedge fund managers enjoy . i proposed changes in ceo compensation . i called for a consumer protection financial bureau before it was created . and i think the best evidence that the wall street people at least know where i stand and where i have always stood is because they are trying to beat me in this primary . they have collected and spent as much as 6 million on these ads . hedge fund billionaires , karl rove , another billionaire , jumped in . and why are they doing that ? these are guys who try to make smart investments . they know my record , they know me , they know that i say what i believe and i will do it . and i also have a pretty good understanding about how to stop them . so i do want people to know that , and i think it's important for everybody to understand i have a record , i have stood firm and i will be the person who prevents them from ever wrecking the economy again . 
clinton crime bill . 
o'malley that's not true . 
clinton . . . family leave for a very long time . . . 
clinton but , yes , i would like students to work 10 hours a week . . . 
sanders secretary secretary clinton didn't answer your question . laughter because what her campaign was saying bernie sanders , who has fought for universal health care for my entire life , he wants to end medicare , end medicaid , end the children's health insurance program . that is nonsense . what a medicare for all program does is finally provide in this country health care for every man , woman and child as a right . now , the truth is , that frank delano roosevelt , harry truman , do you know what they believed in ? they believed that health care should be available to all of our people . i'm on the committee that wrote the affordable care act . i made the affordable care act along with jim clyburn a better piece of legislation . i voted for it , but right now , what we have to deal with is the fact that 29 million people still have no health insurance . we are paying the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs , getting ripped off . and here's the important point , we are spending far more per person on health care than the people of any other country . my proposal , provide health care to all people , get private insurance out of health insurance , lower the cost of health care for middle class families by 5 , 000 bucks . that's the vision we need to take . 
sanders we are not a country that has the courage to stand up to big money and do what has to be done for the working families of the country . secretary clinton will have to explain to the people of our country how it could be that every other major country on earth manages to guarantee health care to all of their people , spending significantly less per capita than we can . i live 50 miles away from canada , you know ? it's not some kind of communist authoritarian country . they're doing ok . they got a health care system that guarantees health care to all people . we can do the same . in terms of public colleges and universities , please don't tell me that we cannot do what many other countries around the world are doing . kids should not be punished and leave school deeply in debt , for what crime ? for trying to get an education . 
clinton when i traveled around the world on you behalf as secretary of state and went to 112 countries , one thing i saw everywhere was how european and asian countries were supporting their companies back in their countries , to be able to make sales and contracts in a lot of the rest of the world . in fact , without the export import bank , supporting businesses of all sizes i believe more jobs would be lost here at home and more jobs literally would be exported . instead of exporting products , we would be exporting jobs . i just believe that senator sanders took that lonely position because most of us who saw the results i saw it as a senator from new york . your senators saw it here in michigan . they can give you the names of 240 companies in michigan that have been helped . there is a company in levonia being helped , there are companies all over this state . i know , if we are going to compete and win in the global economy , we can't let every other country support their companies and we take a hands off approach . i will not agree with that . 
clinton that's true . that's true . crosstalk 
sanders this is a great country , but we have many , many serious problems . we should not be the country that has the highest rate of childhood poverty of any major country and more wealth and income inequality than any other country . we should not be the only major country on earth that does not guarantee health care to all of our people as a right of citizenship and we should not be the only major country that does not provide medical and and parental leave family and parental leave to all of our families . now , at the end of our day , here is the truth that very few candidates will say , is that nobody up here , certainly no republican , can address the major crises facing our country unless millions of people begin to stand up to the billionaire class that has so much power over our economy and our political life . jim webb is right money is pouring in to this campaign through super pacs . we are doing it the old fashioned way 650 , 000 individual contributions . and if people want to help us out , berniesanders . com . we are averaging 30 bucks apiece . we would appreciate your help . 
clinton we went to the united nations yes , he did . we went to the united nations security council . we got support from the security council . and we then supported the efforts of our european and arab allies and partners . this was a request made to our government by the europeans and by the arabs because of their great fear of what chaos in syria would do to them . and if you want to know what chaos does , not just to the people inside but the people on the borders , look at syria . nobody stood up to assad and removed him , and we have had a far greater disaster in syria than we are currently dealing with right now in libya . crosstalk 
sanders well , let me just answer that . what that was about was saying that the united states was wrong to try to invade cuba , that the united states was wrong trying to support people to overthrow the nicaraguan government , that the united states was wrong trying to overthrow in 1954 , the government democratically elected government of guatemala . throughout the history of our relationship with latin america we've operated under the so called monroe doctrine , and that said the united states had the right do anything that they wanted to do in latin america . so i actually went to nicaragua and i very shortly opposed the reagan administration's efforts to overthrow that government . and i strongly opposed earlier henry kissinger and the to overthrow the government of salvador aliende in chile . i think the united states should be working with governments around the world , not get involved in regime change . and all of these actions , by the way , in latin america , brought forth a lot of very strong anti american sentiments . that's what that was about . 
clinton thank you so much . because , when i went to the very end of the 2008 campaign with then senator obama . . . 
sanders all right . 
sanders number one , most important economic reality of today is that over the last 30 years , there has been a transfer of trillions of dollars from the middle class to the top one tenth of one percent who are seeing a doubling of the percentage of wealth that they own . now , when secretary clinton says , i'm not going raise taxes on the middle class , let me tell you what she is saying . she is disagreeing with fdr on social security , lbj on medicare and with the vast majority of progressive democrats in the house and the senate , who today are fighting to end the disgrace of the united states being the only major country on earth that doesn't provide paid family and medical leave . what the legislation is is 1 . 61 a week . now , you can say that's a tax on the middle class . it will provide three months paid family and medical leave for the working families of this country . i think , secretary clinton , 1 . 61 a week is a pretty good investment . 
sanders let's talk about issues . 
o'malley drugs have taken far too many of our citizens . it's a huge public health challenge . in our own city , i mentioned before , we had become the most addicted city in america . but together , every single year , i expanded drug treatment funding within our city and then i expanded it in our state , and we were saving lives every single year doing the things that work , intervening earlier , understanding the continuum of care that's required until we got hit like every other state in the state in the united states , especially in new hampshire and in the northeast with this opioid addiction , the over prescribing . i agree , we need better we need to rein in the over prescribing , but i have put forward on my in my plan a 12 billion federal investment . we have to invest in the local partnerships , and the best place to intervene , the best indicator of when a person is actually on the verge of killing themselves because of an addiction , is at the hospital . that very first time they show up with a near miss , we should be intervening there . that's what i said to my own public health people . what would we do if this were ebola ? how would we act ? so many more americans have been killed by the combination of heroin and these highly addictive pain pills , and yet , we refuse to act . there are thing that can be done . go on to my website . my plan is there . it's one of 15 strategic goals i've set out to make our country a better place by cutting these sort of deaths in half in the next five years . 
clinton . . . if you don't have schools that are able to meet the needs of the people , or good housing , there's a long list . . . . . . we need a new new deal for communities of color . . . 
clinton i have said repeatedly , wolf , i am going to make the wealthy pay into social security to extend the social security trust fund . that is one way . if that is the way that we pursue , i will follow that . but there are other ways . we should be looking at taxing passive income by wealthy people . we should be looking at taxing all of their investment . but here's the real issue , because i i've heard this , i've seen the reports of it . i have said from the very beginning , we are going to protect social security . i was one of the leaders in the fight against bush when he was trying to privatize social security . but we also , in addition to extending the trust fund , which i am absolutely determined to do , we've got to help people who are not being taken care of now . and because social security started in the 1930s , a lot of women have been left out and left behind . and it's time that we provide more benefits for widows , divorcees , for caregivers , for women who deserve more from the social security . . . 
clinton well , let me just follow up on that , anderson , because when i think about capitalism , i think about all the small businesses that were started because we have the opportunity and the freedom in our country for people to do that and to make a good living for themselves and their families . and i don't think we should confuse what we have to do every so often in america , which is save capitalism from itself . and i think what senator sanders is saying certainly makes sense in the terms of the inequality that we have . but we are not denmark . i love denmark . we are the united states of america . and it's our job to rein in the excesses of capitalism so that it doesn't run amok and doesn't cause the kind of inequities we're seeing in our economic system . but we would be making a grave mistake to turn our backs on what built the greatest middle class in the history . . . 
clinton if you're gonna talk , tell the whole story , senator sanders . 
clinton . . . improving , and we learned enough to say what we think happened at benghazi . 
sanders ok . let me agree with much of what the secretary said , but where we have a different background on this issue is we differ on the war in iraq , which created barbaric organizations like isis . not only did i vote against that war , i helped lead the opposition , and if you go to my website , berniesanders . com , you will see the statement that i made in 2002 . and it gives me no pleasure to tell you that much of what i feared would happen the day after saddam hussein was overthrown , in fact , did happen . 
sanders i am very glad , anderson , that secretary clinton discovered religion on this issue but it's a little bit too late . secretary clinton supported virtually every one of the disastrous trade agreements written by corporate america . nafta , supported by the secretary cost , us 800 , 000 jobs nationwide , tens of thousands of jobs in the midwest . permanent normal trade relations with china cost us millions of jobs . look , i was on a picket line in early 1990's against nfata because you didn't need a phd in economics to understand that american workers should not be forced to compete against people in mexico making 25 cents an hour . 
sanders we have a republican leadership in congress now fighting for hundreds of billions of dollars in tax breaks for the top two tenths of one percent , but somehow we can't come up with the money to fix detroit's crumbling public school system . somehow we cannot make sure that detroit has qualified , and good teachers . somehow we can't make sure that there are summer programs for your children , and after school programs for your children . somehow we cannot do what other countries around the world , is provide quality childcare and pre k . we have got to change our national priorities , no more tax breaks for billionaires , and large corporations . we are going to invest in our children , and have the best public school system in the world . 
sanders no , you didn't . my legi . . . 
o'malley anderson , i think we are learning . . . crosstalk 
o'malley and andrea andrea andrea . . . 
sanders . . . through excuse me , i'm talking . 
sanders given the fact that she's a lot smarter than me , yes , she would . laughter and let me , by the way , take this moment to congratulate hillary clinton , who i thought not only did an outstanding job as our first lady , but redefined what that role could be . so , i thank you very much for that . laughter my wife , jane , has been way back when before i knew her , a foster parent . many , many kids came into her home and received the kind of love that they desperately needed . and she turned around many lives . she is the best parent and grandmother that i know . she has devoted her life , when i was mayor of the city of burlington , actually when i first met her , we started a youth office , which started a after school programs for kids , started a child care center , started a youth newspaper . we got the kids involved in a whole lot of issues . she led that effort . so i think , at a time when so many of our kids are desperately looking for constructive activity , where too many of our kids are hanging around on street corners , potentially getting into trouble , i think we need a forceful advocate for the children , for teenagers , for the little children , to deal with the dysfunctional child care system , and i think my wife would do a great job in helping me accomplish those goals . 
sanders then inaudible . . . 
sanders ok . i just wanted to add , in the previous question , i voted against the usa patriot act for many of the reasons that governor o'malley mentioned . but it is not only the government that we have to worry about , it is private corporations . you would all be amazed , or maybe not , about the amount of information private companies and the government has in terms of the web sites that you access , the products that you buy , where you are this very moment . and it is very clear to me that public policy has not caught up with the explosion of technology . so yes , we have to work with silicon valley to make sure that we do not allow isis to transmit information . . . 
clinton . . . so a lot of a lot of what we're talking about can actually be implemented . . . 
clinton well , i'm happy to be here in new hampshire for this debate , as we move toward the primary on tuesday . i believe that america has the opportunity to once again live by our values , live up to our values in the 21st century , but i think that america can only do that if americans can succeed . and there are lots of reasons why americans today are feeling left out and left behind . yes , of course , the economy has not been working for most americans . yes , of course , we have special interests that are unfortunately doing too much to rig the game . but there's also the continuing challenges of racism , of sexism , of discrimination against the lgbt community , of the way that we treat people as opposed to how we want to be treated . i believe that we can get back on the right track . i want to imagine a country where people's wages reflect their hard work , where we have healthcare for everyone , and where every child gets to live up to his or her potential . i'm fighting for people who cannot wait for those changes , and i'm not making promises that i cannot keep . 
clinton i never said that . 
sanders first of all , let's have some rules here , commentators . 
sanders can i get 50 seconds ? 
o'malley anderson , in our state , we actually expanded family leave . and i have to agree with secretary clinton and senator sanders . look , the genius of our nation is that we find ways in every generation to include more of our people more fully in the economic life of our country , and we need to do that for our families , and especially so that women aren't penalized in having to drop out of the workforce . my wife , katie , is here with our four kids . and , man , that was a juggle when we had little kids and and keeping jobs and moving forwards . we would be a stronger nation economically if we had paid family leave . 
clinton yes , i do . andyou know , what i hope the supreme court will do is make it absolutely clear that any state that continues capital punishment either must meet the highest standards of evidentiary proof of effective assistance of counsel or they cannot continue it because that , to me , is the real dividing line . i have much more confidence in the federal system , and i do reserve it for particularly heinous crimes in the federal system , like terrorism . i have strong feelings about that . i thought it was appropriate after a very thorough trial that timothy mcveigh received the death penalty for blowing up the federal building in oklahoma city , killing 168 people , including 19 children in a daycare center . i do for very limited , particularly heinous crimes believe it is an appropriate punishment , but i deeply disagree with the way that too many states are still implementing it . if it were possible to separate the federal from the state system by the supreme court , that would , i think , be an appropriate outcome . 
sanders well , i think our great task is to make certain that our young men and women in the military do not get sucked into never ending , perpetual warfare within the quagmire of syria and iraq . and i will do my very best to make sure that that doesn't happen . i agree with the secretary that i think what has to happenand let me just mention what king abdullah of jordan said . i think he hit the nail on the head . and what he said is essentially the war against isis is a war for the soul of islam . and it must be muslim troops on the ground that will destroy isis , with the support of a coalition of major powersu . s . , u . k . , france , germany and russia . so our job is to provide them the military equipment that they need ; the air support they need ; special forces when appropriate . but at the end of the day for a dozen different reasons , not the least of which is that isis would like american combat troops on the ground so they could reach out to the muslim world and say , look , we're taking on those terrible americans . the combat on the ground must be done by muslim troops with our support . we must not get involved in perpetual warfare in the middle east . 
sanders the way i would move forward in every other area . and what we are doing in this campaign is fighting not only to become president , but i'm the only candidate who says no president , not bernie sanders , can do it all . you know what we need , karen ? we need a political revolution in this country . and when millions of people stand up and tell the fossil fuel industry that their profits , their short term profits are less significant than the long term health of this planet , we will win . that is the way change always takes place . 
sanders not losing control of our campaign . you know , we have hired a whole lot of people in a rapid way and i am familiar with the first two instances and they are unacceptable , and we have apologized and dealt with that . in terms of the last one , as i understand it , we did not suggest that we had the endorsement of a newspaper . newspapers who make endorsements also say positive things about other candidates , and to the best of my knowledge , that is what we did . so we never said , never said that somebody , a newspaper endorsed us that did not . what we did say is blah blah blah blah was said by the newspaper . 
sanders we don't eliminate medicare . we expand medicare to all people . and we will not , under this proposal , have a situation that we have right now with the affordable care act where you have states like south carolina , and many other republican states , that because of their right wing political ideology , are denying millions of people the expansion of medicaid that we passed in the affordable care act . ultimately , we have got to say as a nation , secretary clinton , is health care a right of all people or is it not ? i believe it is a right . 
sanders the planet the future of the planet is at stake . 
sanders i would think that a speech so great that you got paid so much money for , you would like to share it with the american people . so i think she should release the transcript . laughter and applause crosstalk 
o'malley i believe that we need to focus on destroying isil . that is the clear and present danger . and i believe that we can springboard off of this new u . n . resolution , and we should create , as secretary clinton indicated , and i agree with that , that there should be a political process . but we shouldn't be the ones declaring that assad must go . where did it ever say in the constitution , where is it written that it's the job of the united states of america or its secretary of state to determine when dictators have to go ? we have a role to play in this world . but it is not the world the role of traveling the world looking for new monsters to destroy . crosstalk 
clinton and , yes , people we may disagree with on a number of things may have some insight , may have some relationships that are important for the president to understand in order to best protect the united states . 
sanders let me . . . 
sanders . . . not just for billionaires . 
clinton i am not going to contradict the president's strategy on this . and i'm not going to engage in hypotheticals . i fully support the president . and i believe that the president the president is on the right side of both the constitution and history . and the senate needs to immediately begin to respond . so i'm going to support the president . when i am president , i will take stock of where we are and move from there . 
webb ok . thank you . laughter 
sanders my father came to this country at the age of 17 without any money . never made any money . we lived in a three and half room rent controlled apartment . so i learned about economics , not just in college , but in living in a family that didn't have money that had to scrape by . we are here tonight in flint , michigan , because a horrendous tragedy is taking place . but it's not just in flint , michigan . we are have 29 million people who have no health insurance . we're the only major country on earth that doesn't provide paid family and medical leave . we have school systems around america that are collapsing . and yet we are the wealthiest country in the history of the world . but most people don't know that because almost all of the new incoming wealth is going to the top one percent . i believe , and with all due respect to my good friend , secretary clinton , that it is too late for establishment politics and establishment economics . it is too late for a corrupt campaign finance system and super pacs that raise enormous amounts of money from special interests . we need in this country a political revolution where ordinary people stand up and reclaim the government that men and women fought and died for . thank you . 
clinton . . . that means we have to limit mandatory minimums , we have to end disparities and treatment at last through incarceration . . . 
sanders david , let me give you a little bit of background here . the dnc has hired vendors . on two occasions , there were breeches in information two months ago . our staff found information on our computers from the clinton campaign . and when our staffers said , whoa , what's going here ? they went to the dnc quietly . they went to the vendor and said , hey , something is wrong , and that was quietly dealt with . none of that information was looked at . our staffer at that point did exactly the right thing . a few days ago a similar incident happened . there was a breach because the dnc vendor screwed up , information came to our campaign . in this case , our staff did the wrong thing they looked at that information . as soon as we learned that they looked at that information we fired that person . we are now doing an independent internal investigation to see who else was involved . thirdly , what i have a really problem , and as you mentioned this is a problem , i recognize it as a problem . but what the dnc did arbitrarily without discussing it with us is shut off our access to our information crippling our campaign . that is an egregious act . i'm glad that late last night , that was resolved . 
o'malley john , i don't think that there is a crisis at the state or local level that really you can point to and say , therefore , i am prepared for the sort of crises that any man or woman who is commander in chief of our country has to deal with . but i can tell you this . i can tell you that as a mayor and as a governor , i learned certain disciplines which i believe are directly applicable to that very , very powerful and most important of all jobs in the united states , the president , whose first and primary duty is to protect the people of our country . you learn that threats always change . you learn to create a security cabinet . you learn to create feedback mechanisms . you learn to constantly evaluate and understand the nature of the threats that you are being faced with . i have been tried under many different emergencies and i can tell you that in each of those emergencies , whether they were inflicted by drug gangs , whether they were natural emergencies , i knew how to lead and i knew how to govern because i know how to manage people in a crisis and be very clear about the goal of protecting human life . 
sanders i am very glad to . . . crosstalk 
sanders let me just jump in . my name was invoked . 
sanders . . . healthcare with mental health . . . 
sanders let me respond to . . . 
clinton well , if i can say . . . 
clinton i certainly agree with fdr for all the reasons senator sanders said . and i agree about the role that he played both in war and in peace on the economy and defeating fascism around the world . i would choose nelson mandela for his generosity of heart , his understanding of the need for reconciliation . but i want to i want to follow up on something having to do with leadership , because , you know , today senator sanders said that president obama failed the presidential leadership test . and this is not the first time that he has criticized president obama . in the past he has called him weak . he has called him a disappointment . he wrote a forward for a book that basically argued voters should have buyers' remorse when it comes to president obama's leadership and legacy . and i just couldn't agree disagree more with those kinds of comments . you know , from my perspective , maybe because i understand what president obama inherited , not only the worst financial crisis but the antipathy of the republicans in congress , i don't think he gets the credit he deserves for being a president . . . . . . who got us out of that . . . . . . put us on firm ground , and has sent us into the future . and it is a the kind of criticism that we've heard from senator sanders about our president i expect from republicans . i do not expect from someone running for the democratic nomination to succeed president obama . 
sanders absolutely . they can go i don't think they will , but donald trump's kids donald trump's kids can go to public school right now , i think secretary clinton is talking about making community colleges free , they can go to those things . the point is we are going to get to donald trump by raising the taxes on the top 1 percent and our millionaires and billionaires . but all of our people , in my view , regardless of income , should have a right to get a higher education . i want children in the third grade to know that if they study hard , no matter what the income of their families , my family didn't have any income , my parents didn't go to college , they didn't have good income . i want every kid to know if you do your school work , study hard , yes , you will be able to get a college education . 
sanders poverty is increasing . and if wages are going down , i don't know why we need millions of people to be coming into this country as guestworkers who will work for lower wages than american workers and drive wages down even lower than they are right now . end video clip crosstalk 
sanders inaudible . 
o'malley well , i think the key word in your followup there was the word settle . that's true . it was settled . arrests peaked in 2003 , anderson , but they declined every year after that as we restored peace in our poorer neighborhoods so that people could actually walk and not have to worry about their kids or their loved ones of being victims of violent crime . look , none of this is easy . none of us has all the answers . but together as a city , we saved a lot of lives . it was about leadership . it was about principle . and it was about bringing people together . 
clinton and so thank you for having us , and i look forward to the debate . 
sanders and we are going to do a political revolution , which brings working people , young people , senior citizens , minorities together . because every issue that i am talking about paid family and medical leave , breaking up the banks on wall street , asking the wealth to pay their fair share of taxes , rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure , raising the minimum wage to 15 bucks an hour every one of those issues is supported by a significant majority of the american people . the problem is , that as a result of a corrupt campaign finance system , congress is not listening to the american people . its listening to the big money interest . what the political revolution is about is bringing people together to finally say , enough is enough . this government belongs to us . not just the billionaires . 
sanders not only not only do i apologize to secretary clinton and i hope we can work together on an independent investigation from day one i want to apologize to my supporters . this is not the type of campaign that we run . and if i find anybody else involved in this , they will also be fired . 
sanders no , it is not throwing it is an extraordinary investment for this country . germany , many other countries do it already . in fact , if you remember , 50 , 60 years ago , the university of california , city university of new york were virtually tuition free . here is the story it's not just the college graduates should be 50 , 000 or 100 , 000 in debt . more importantly , i want kids in burlington , vermont , or baltimore , maryland , who are in the sixth grade or the eighth grade , who don't have a lot of money , whose parents like my parents may never have gone to college . do you know where i'm going , kevin ? i want those kids to know that if they study hard , they do their homework , regardless of the income of their families , they will in fact be able to get a college education because we are going to make public colleges and universities tuition free . this is revolutionary for education in america . it will give hope to millions of young people . 
sanders ok . you know , you judge a nation not by the number of millionaires and billionaires it has , but by how you treat , we treat , the most vulnerable and fragile people in our nation . and by those standards , we're not doing particularly well . we have the highest rate of childhood poverty among almost any major country on earth . and in terms of seniors , there are millions of seniors and i've talked to them in my state of vermont and all over this country who are trying to get by on 11 , 000 , 12 , 000 , 13 , 000 a year social security . and you know what ? you do the arithmetic . you can't get by on 11 , 000 , 12 , 000 , 13 , 000 a year . and here's an area where secretary clinton and i believe we have a difference . i have long supported the proposition that we should lift the cap on taxable income coming into the social security trust fund , starting at 250 , 000 . and when we and when we do that , we don't do what the republicans want , which is to cut social security . we do what the american people want , to expand social security by 1 , 300 a year for people under 16 , 000 , and we extend the life of social security for 58 years . yes , the wealthiest people , the top 1 . 5 percent , will pay more in taxes . but a great nation like ours should not be in a position where elderly people are cutting their pills in half , where they don't have decent nutrition , where they can't heat their homes in the wintertime . that is not what america should be about . if elected president , i will do everything i can to expand social security benefits , not just for seniors , but for disabled veterans , as well . 
sanders fourthly , i work look forward to working with secretary clinton for an investigation , an independent investigation , about all of the breaches that have occurred from day one in this campaign , because i am not convinced that information from our campaign may not have ended up in her campaign . don't know that . but we need an independent investigation , and i hope secretary clinton will agree with me for the need of that . last point . when we saw the breach two months , we didn't go running to the media and make a big deal about it . and it bothers me very much that , rather than working on this issue to resolve it , it has become many press releases from the clinton campaign later . 
clinton well , sadly it's reality , and it has been heartbreaking , and incredibly outraging to see the constant stories of young men like walter scott , as you said , who have been killed by police officers . their needs to be a concerted effort to address the systemic racism in our criminal justice system . and , that requires a very clear , agenda for retraining police officers , looking at ways to end racial profiling , finding more ways to really bring the disparities that stalk our country into high relief . one out of three african american men may well end up going to prison . that's the statistic . i want people hear to think what we would be doing if it was one out of three white men , and very often , the black men are arrested , convicted and incarcerated . . . . . . for offensive that do not lead to the same results for white men . so , we have a very serious problem that we can no longer ignore . 
clinton i am advocating the no fly zone both because i think it would help us on the ground to protect syrians ; i'm also advocating it because i think it gives us some leverage in our conversations with russia . now that russia has joined us in the security council , has adopted an agreement that we hashed out a long day in geneva three years ago , now i think we can have those conversations . the no fly zone , i would hope , would be also shared by russia . if they will begin to turn their military attention away from going after the adversaries of assad toward isis and put the assad future on the political and diplomatic track , where it belongs . crosstalk 
sanders wolf , the answer is , you know , what we have always done in my family is , jane does them . and she's been out on the campaign trail . we will get them out . we'll get them out very shortly . it's not a big deal . 
sanders let's do more let's do more than reverse the immunity . let's . . . 
clinton i think it's important . . . . . . to point out that . . . . . . you know , we're we're having a discussion about the best way to raise money from wealthy people to extend the social security trust fund . think about what the other side wants to do . they're calling social security a ponzi scheme . they still want to privatize it . in fact , their whole idea is to turn over the social security trust fund to wall street , something you and i would never let happen . 
clinton you know , you don't you know , you don't have to do much more than look at rising insurance rates . 
sanders i think the governor gave a very good example about the weaknesses in that law and i think we have to take another look at it . but here is the point , governor . we can raise our voices , but i come from a rural state , and the views on gun control in rural states are different than in urban states , whether we like it or not . our job is to bring people together around strong , commonsense gun legislation . i think there is a vast majority in this country who want to do the right thing , and i intend to lead the country in bringing our people together . 
sanders absolutely . 
sanders . . . people all over this country not you , secretary clinton are shouting at each other . and what we need to do is bring people together to work on the agreement where there is broad consensus and that's what i intend to do . crosstalk 
clinton demonize hard working immigrants who have insulted them . you know , i came to las vegas in , i think , may . early may . met with a group of dreamers , i wish everybody in america could meet with this young people , to hear their stories , to know their incredible talent , their determination , and that's why i would go further . . . 
clinton martha , we offered a lot more than they were willing to take . we offered a lot more . we also got rid of their chemical weapons , which was a big help , and we also went after a lot of the shoulder fired missiles to round them up . you know , we can't if we're not going to send american troops , which there was never any idea of doing that , then to try to send trainers , to try to send experts , is something we offered , europeans offered , the u . n . offered , and there wasn't a lot of responsiveness at first . i think a lot of the libyans who had been forced out of their country by gadhafi who came back to try to be part of a new government , believed they knew what to do and it turned out that they were no match for some of the , you know , militaristic forces inside that country . but i'm not giving up on libya and i don't think anybody should . we've been at this a couple of years . 
sanders if i could just answer that , we have also got to take a look at the waste and inefficiencies in the department of defense , which is the one major agency of government that has not been able to be audited . and i have the feeling you're going to find a lot of cost overruns there and a lot of waste and duplicative activities . 
clinton absolutely . absolutely . you know , rachel , you and i have talked about this before . i thank you for going to flint to hold that town hall . i will be in flint at the mayor's invitation on sunday to get an in depth briefing about what is , and is not happening . this is an emergency . everyday that goes by that these people , particularly the children , are not tested so we can know what steps must be taken to try to remediate the effects of the poisoning that they have been living with is a day lost in a child's life . i know from the work that i've done over so many years , lead , the toxic nature of lead can affect you brain development , your body development , your behavior . i absolutely believe that what is being done is not sufficient . we need to be absolutely clear about everything that should be done from today to tomorrow , into the future to try to remedy the terrible burden that the people of flint are barring . that includes fixing their pipes , it includes guaranteeing whatever healthcare and educational embellishments they may need going forward , and i think the federal government has way where it can bill the state of michigan . if michigan won't do it , there have to be ways that we can begin to move , and then make them pay for it , and hold them accountable . 
clinton you know , most of the property in florida will be at risk in the next 50 years . i think i can get a bipartisan consensus on resilience and then implementing the president's orders until we frankly win back enough seats , take back the senate , and get back to bipartisan . . . crosstalk 
clinton well , i think that's pretty obvious . i think being the first woman president would be quite a change from the presidents we've had up until this point , including president obama . 
sanders well , i've known secretary clinton , how long , 25 years ? we worked together in the senate . and i said that in response to the kind of attacks we were getting from the clinton , uh , campaign . washington post headline says clinton campaign says sanders is unqualified and that's what the surrogates were saying . does secretary clinton have the experience and the intelligence to be a president ? of course she does . but i do question . . . . . . but i do question her judgment . i question a judgment which voted for the war in iraq . . . . . . the worst foreign policy blunder in the history of this country , voted for virtually every disastrous trade agreement which cost us millions of decent paying jobs . and i question her judgment about running super pacs which are collecting tens of millions of dollars from special interests , including 15 million from wall street . i don't believe that that is . . . . . . the kind of judgment we need to be the kind of president we need . 
sanders oh wait a minute . can i have . . . 
sanders i will make a personal promise to you that the epa and the epa director that i appoint will make sure that every water system in the united states of america is tested , and that the people of those communities know the quality of the water that they are drinking , and that we are gonna have a plan to rebuild water systems in this country that are unsafe for drinking . 
webb . . . lost ph i introduced that in 2007 we need a comprehensive reform , and we need to be able to define our borders . 
sanders well , when we talk about efforts to assist immigrants , secretary clinton prevailed upon the governor of new york , elliot spitzer , who wanted to do the right thing and provide driver's license to these who were undocumented , she said don't do it , and new york state still does not do it . in vermont , by the way , i worked with officials and undocumented people in vermont do have the ability to get driver's license . when we talk about immigration , the secretary will remember that one of the great tragedies , human tragedies of recent years is children came from honduras where there's probably more violence than almost any place in this country , and they came into this country . and i said welcome those children into this country , secretary clinton said send them back . that's a difference . 
sanders what we are talking about in reality is a corrupt campaign finance system , that's what we're talking about . we have to be honest about it . it is undermining american democracy . when extraordinarily wealthy people make very large contributions to super pacs , and in many cases in this campaign , super pacs have raised more money than individual candidates have , ok ? we had a decision to make early on , do we do a super pac ? and , we said no . we don't represent wall street , we don't represent the billionaire class , so it ends up i'm the only candidate up here of the many candidates who has no super pac . but , what we did is we said to the working families of this country , look , we know things are tough , but if you want to help us go beyond establishment politics , and establishment economics , send us something . and , it turns out that up until and this has blown me away , never in a million years would i have believed that i would be standing here tonight telling you that we have received three and a half million individual contributions from well over a million people . now , secretary clinton's super pac , as i understand it , received 25 million dollars last reporting period , 15 million dollars from wall street . our average contribution is 27 dollars , i'm very proud of that . 
clinton we are on the path to doing that thanks to president obama and the affordable care act , we have 90 percent coverage . we are lacking 10 percent . we are going to stay on that and get to 100 percent universal coverage . 
o'malley and i have an f from the nra , senator . 
clinton well , once again , if we're going to argue about the '90s , let's try to get the facts straight . that bill had a lot of provisions that unfortunately were stripped out by george w . bush , by republican governors . and i disagreed with the way it was applied . and i have a very clear set of ideas about what should be done to try to provide more support , including trying to cut poverty in half in the next years . but if we are going to talk about the '90s , let's talk about 23 million new jobs , incomes went up for everybody . the median african american income went up 33 percent at the end of the '90s and we lifted more people out of poverty than at any other time in recent history . so we were on the right path . more jobs , rising incomes . 
clinton . . . to carry out what the remaining one third of the cost . 
sanders it's exactly about rural . 
o'malley ok . so , that was eight years . yes . and senator , but i actually did it during a budget down time i mean , during a recession . and andrea , the i had to make more cuts than any governor in the history of maryland , but we invested more in infrastructure , more in transportation . we made our public schools more in america more than five years in a row , and went four years in a row without a penny's increase to college tuition . the things that we need to do in our country , like debt free college in the next five years , like making universal like making national service a universal option in order to cut youth unemployment in half in the next three years , all these things can be done if we eliminate one entitlement we can no longer afford as a nation . and that is the wealthy among us , those making more than a million dollars , feel that they are entitled to paying a much lower marginal tax rate than was usual for the better part of these 80 years . and if we tax earnings from investments on money namely capital gains at the same rate as we tax sweat and hard work and toil , we can make the investments we need to make to make our country better . 
clinton if we can . . . crosstalk . . . raise it to 15 in new york . . . crosstalk . . . or los angeles or seattle . . . 
o'malley juan carlos , i think what you've heard up here is some of the old thinking on immigration reform , and that's why it's gridlocked . we need to understand that our country is stronger in every generation by the arrival of new american immigrants . that is why i have put out a policy for comprehensive immigration reform , that is why i would go further than president obama has on daca , and dapa . i mean , we are a nation of immigrants , we are made stronger by immigrants . do you think for a second that simply because somebody's standing in a broken que on naturalization they're not going to go to the hospital , and that care isn't going to fall on to our insurance rates ? i am for a generous , compassionate america that says we're all in this together . we need comprehensive 
clinton . . . when i am president . 
sanders the secretary's obviously right . it is enormously complicated . but here's something that i believe we have to do as we put together an international coalition , and that is we have to understand that the muslim nations in the region saudi arabia , iran , turkey , jordan all of these nations , they're going to have to get their hands dirty , their boots on the ground . they are going to have to take on isis . this is a war for the soul of islam . and those countries who are opposed to islam , they are going to have to get deeply involved in a way that is not the case today . we should be supportive of that effort . so should the uk , so should france . but those muslim countries are going to have to lead the effort . they are not doing it now . 
clinton i was in the senate . and they said , give us absolute immunity . no other industry in america has absolute immunity . . . crosstalk 
chafee anderson , you're looking at a block of granite when it comes to the issues . whether it's . . . crosstalk 
sanders let me just respond to something the secretary said . first of all , she is talking about , as i understand it , a no fly zone in syria , which i think is a very dangerous situation . could lead to real problems . second of all , i heard the same evidence from president bush and dick cheney and don rumsfeld about why we should overthrow saddam hussein and get involved in the i would urge people to go to berniesanders . com , hear what i said in 2002 . and i say , without any joy in my heart , that much of what i thought would happen about the destabilization , in fact , did happen . so i think . . . 
clinton a group of national security experts , military intelligence experts , issued a very concerning statement about senator sanders's views on foreign policy and national security , pointing out some of the comments he has made on these issues , such as inviting iranian troops into syria to try to resolve the conflict there ; putting them right at the doorstep of israel . asking saudi arabia and iran to work together , when they can't stand each other and are engaged in a proxy battle right at this moment . so i do think questions have been raised and questions have to be answered because when new hampshire voters go on tuesday to cast your vote , you are voting both for a president and a commander in chief . and there is no way to predict what comes in the door of that white house from day to day that can pose a threat to the united states or one of our friends and allies , and i think this is a big part of the job interview that we are all conducting with the voters here . 
clinton he broke the laws of the united states . he could have been a whistleblower . he could have gotten all of the protections of being a whistleblower . he could have raised all the issues that he has raised . and i think there would have been a positive response to that . 
clinton no . i think that we have the opportunity through the states that are pursuing recreational marijuana to find out a lot more than we know today . i do support the use of medical marijuana , and i think even there we need to do a lot more research so that we know exactly how we're going to help people for whom medical marijuana provides relief . so , i think we're just at the beginning , but i agree completely with the idea that we have got to stop imprisoning people who use marijuana . therefore , we need more states , cities , and the federal government to begin to address this so that we don't have this terrible result that senator sanders was talking about where we have a huge population in our prisons for nonviolent , low level offenses that are primarily due to marijuana . 
clinton well , i'll tell you who is on my side . paul krugman , the nobel prize winning economist , who said my plan for what we should do to reign in wall street was more comprehensive and better . paul volcker , one of the leading lights of trying to reign in the excesses , has also said he does not support reinstating glass steagall . so , i mean this may seem like a bit of an arcane discussion . i have nothing against the passion that my two friends here have about reinstating glass steagall . i just don't think it would get the job done . i'm all about making sure we actually get results for whatever we do . 
o'malley i'd like to take a matter of personal privilege here . . . 
clinton . . . well , we set conditions on iran . we worked hard to get them established , and to be enforced , and then we talked . that's exactly the right . . . crosstalk . . . and , that's what i did with the president , so he and i are on the very same page . 
clinton well , let's talk about the global environmental crisis . starting in 2009 as your secretary of state , i worked with president obama to bring china and india to the table for the very first time , to get a commitment out of them that they would begin to address their own greenhouse gas emissions . i continued to work on that throughout the four years as secretary of state , and i was very proud that president obama and america led the way to the agreement that was finally reached in paris with 195 nations committing to take steps to actually make a difference in climate change . and , i was surprised and disappointed when senator sanders attacked the agreement , said it was not enough , it didn't go far enough . you know , at some point putting together 195 countries , i know a little bit about that , was a major accomplishment . . . 
o'malley say it . 
o'malley and we have never used it . 
sanders but that was only forthat was not to be on television . that's an important point . that was just somethingas the secretary knows , you put titles on ads and you send them out , but there was no word in that ad , none , that said that those newspapers had endorsed us . 
sanders but can i respond to that briefly ? 
sanders well , you've got to look at what the career is about . and this is a career that has stood up to every special interest in this country . i don't take money from wall street . i demand that we break up the large financial institutions . i don't take money from the pharmaceutical industry because i believe they are ripping off the american people and charging us the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs . i don't take money from the fossil fuel industry because they are destroying they are destroying this planet through their emissions of carbon and creating the terrible climate change that we are seeing . so i think it is true that i have served in congress for many years . but if you check my record , it is a record of strength for the environment , for workers , for seniors . unlike the secretary , i believe we should expand social security benefits . it is a record of achievement for veterans , working with republicans , helping to craft the most significant veterans healthcare bill passed in many decades . so i think the point is look at the record , and it's a record that i am proud of . 
clinton if i could . . . you know , i think it's very hard to make the case that ted kennedy , barack obama , me , la raza , united farmworkers , dolores huerta , leaders of the latino community , would have supported a bill that actually promoted modern slavery . that was one of the many excuses used not to vote for the 2007 bill . and i will go back to what i said . if we had been able to get that passed , we would be so much further along now . i'm committed to defending dapa and daca . i'm committed to going even further to get more people deferred action , to go as far as i can under the law . and i am committed to introducing comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship in the first 100 days of my presidency . 
clinton well , i think i think that is very unfair to a few you mentioned , most particularly jordan , which has put a lot on the line for the united states , has also taken in hundreds of thousands of refugees from syria , and has been , therefore , subjected to threats and attacks by extremists themselves . i do agree that in particular , turkey and the gulf nations have got to make up their minds . are they going to stand with us against this kind of jihadi radicalism or not ? and there are many ways of doing it . they can provide forces . they can provide resources . but they need to be absolutely clear about where they stand . 
clinton and i of course sympathize with members of the families who are still , you know , very much grieving . and i wish that there could be an easy answer at the time , but we learned a lot , and the intelligence kept . . . 
sanders well , as somebody who has a d minus voting record . . . crosstalk 
clinton . . . of the world . 
o'malley and , anderson , i also had to overcome a lot of opposition in the leadership of my own party to get this done . look , it's fine to talk about all of these things and i'm glad we're talking about these things but i've actually done them . we passed comprehensive gun safety legislation , not by looking at the pollings or looking at what the polls said . we actually did it . and , anderson , here tonight in our audience are two people that make this issue very , very real . sandy and lonnie phillips are here from colorado . and their daughter , jessie , was one of those who lost their lives in that awful mass shooting in aurora . now , to try to transform their grief , they went to court , where sometimes progress does happen when you file in court , but in this case , you want to talk about a a rigged game , senator ? the game was rigged . a man had sold 4 , 000 rounds of military ammunition to this this person that killed their daughter , riddled her body with five bullets , and he didn't even ask where it was going . and not only did their case get thrown out of court , they were slapped with 200 , 000 in court fees because of the way that the nra gets its way in our congress and we take a backseat . it's time to stand up and pass comprehensive gun safety legislation as a nation . 
sanders nothing real will get happened . unless we have a political revolution . where millions of people finally stand up . 
sanders ok , let me answer that question because it's a huge question . and one of the huge , i know . laughter one of the points that i've been making , and media does not seem to pick up on it , is that we have a real crisis not only with real unemployment in america being close to 10 percent , but youth unemployment in this country . if you look at latino kids between 17 and 20 who graduated high school , 36 percent of them are unemployed or underemployed . . . 
clinton well , thank you , and thanks to everyone for hosting this first of the democratic debates . i'm hillary clinton . i have been proud and privileged to serve as first lady , as a senator from new york , and as secretary of state . i'm the granddaughter of a factory worker and the grandmother of a wonderful one year old child . and every day , i think about what we need to do to make sure that opportunity is available not just for her , but for all of our children . i have spent a very long time my entire adult life looking for ways to even the odds to help people have a chance to get ahead , and , in particular , to find the ways for each child to live up to his or her god given potential . i've traveled across our country over the last months listening and learning , and i've put forward specific plans about how we're going to create more good paying jobs by investing in infrastructure and clean energy , by making it possible once again to invest in science and research , and taking the opportunity posed by climate change to grow our economy . at the center of my campaign is how we're going to raise wages . yes , of course , raise the minimum wage , but we have to do so much more , including finding ways so that companies share profits with the workers who helped to make them . and then we have to figure out how we're going to make the tax system a fairer one . right now , the wealthy pay too little and the middle class pays too much . so i have specific recommendations about how we're going to close those loopholes , make it clear that the wealthy will have to pay their fair share , and have a series of tax cuts for middle class families . and i want to do more to help us balance family and work . i believe in equal pay for equal work for women , but i also believe it's about time we had paid family leave for american families and join the rest of the world . during the course of the evening tonight , i'll have a chance to lay out all of my plans and the work that i've done behind them . but for me , this is about bringing our country together again . and i will do everything i can to heal the divides the divides economically , because there's too much inequality ; the racial divides ; the continuing discrimination against the lgbt community so that we work together and , yes , finally , fathers will be able to say to their daughters , you , too , can grow up to be president . 
sanders well . 
sanders i think i think that there is profound frustration all over this country with establishment politics . i am the only candidate running for president who is not a billionaire , who has raised substantial sums of money , and i do not have a super pac . i am not raising money from millionaires and billionaires , and in fact , tonight , in terms of what a political revolution is about , there are 4 , 000 house parties 100 , 000 people in this country watching this debate tonight who want real change in this country . 
clinton how are we going to get health care for everybody . . . crosstalk 
o'malley look these are the things that we did in own state through the recession . we actually passed a living wage . we raised the minimum wage . we actually raised it to the highest goals of any state in the nation also in minority and women participant goals because we understood that the way you reinvigorate and make fair market american capitalism work , is to make the choices and the investments that include more people more full in the economic success of your state . all through the recession , we defended the highest median income in america and the second highest median income for african american families . how ? by actually doing more for education . we increased education funding by 37 percent . we were the only state in american that went four years in a row without a penny increase in college tuition . we invested more in our infrastructure and we squared our shoulders to the great business opportunity of this era and that is moving our economy to a 100 percent clean electric energy future . we created 2 , 000 new jobs in the solar industry and we fought every single day to adopt more inclusive economic practices . 
sanders what we need is leadership in this country which revitalizes american democracy , and makes people understand that if they stand up and fight back and take on the billionaire class , we can bring about the change that we need . if we are not successful , if we continue the same old , same old of washington being run by corporate lobbyists and big money interests , nothing changes . what i am very happy in this campaign that we have had rallies with tens of thousands of people , mostly young people . what the polls are showing is that we are actually defeating the secretary among younger people . we're giving young people and working people hope that real change can take place in america . that's what the political revolution is about . 
clinton but i do take what alan krueger said seriously . he is the foremost expert in our country on the minimum wage , and what its effects are . and the overall message is that it doesn't result in job loss . however , what alan krueger said in the piece you're referring to is that if we went to 15 , there are no international comparisons . that is why i support a 12 national federal minimum wage . that is what the democrats in the senate have put forward as a proposal . but i do believe that is a minimum . and places like seattle , like los angeles , like new york city , they can go higher . it's what happened in governor o'malley's state . there was a minimum wage at the state level , and some places went higher . i think that is . . . 
sanders no . crosstalk 
sanders no , let . . . 
clinton excuse me , excuse me . 
sanders i voted against those trade agreements . 
sanders as someone who has taken on probably every special interest that there is in washington , i would lump wall street and the pharmaceutical industry at the top of my life of people who do not like me . 
sanders are you for a tax on carbon or not ? 
clinton well , look , i believe that we've made great progress as a country with the affordable care act . we've been struggling to get this done since harry truman . and it was not only a great accomplishment of the democratic party , but of president obama . i do think that it's important to defend it . the republicans have voted to repeal it nearly 60 times . they would like to rip it up and start all over again , throw our nation back into this really contentious debate that we've had about health care for quite some time now . i want to build on and improve the affordable care act . i would certainly tackle the cost issues , because i think that once the foundation was laid with a system to try to get as many people as possible into it , to end insurance discrimination against people with preexisting conditions or women , for example , that , yes , we were going to have to figure out how to get more competition in the insurance market , how to get the costs of particularly , prescription drugs , but other out of pocket expenses down . but i think it's important to understand there's a significant difference that i have with senator sanders about how best to provide quality , affordable health care for everyone . and it's it's a worthy debate . it's an important one that we should be engaged in . 
webb no , actually i believe that i am where the democratic party traditionally has been . the democratic party , and the reason i've decided to run as a democrat , has been the party that gives people who otherwise have no voice in the corridors of power a voice . and that is not determined by race . and as a clarification , i have always supported affirmative action for african americans . that's the way the program was originally designed because of their unique history in this country , with slavery and the jim crow laws that followed . what i have discussed a number of times is the idea that when we create diversity programs that include everyone , quote , of color , other than whites , struggling whites like the families in the appalachian mountains , we're not being true to the democratic party principle of elevating the level of consciousness among our people about the hardships that a lot of people who happen to be have by culture , by the way . 
sanders and i voted against wall street deregulation . 
clinton well , i was pleased that nato announced just this week that they're going to start doing patrols in the mediterranean , in the aegean , to try to interdict the smugglers , to try to prevent the kind of tragedies that we have seen all too often , also to try to prevent more refugees from coming to the european union . and it's especially significant that they are working with both turkey and greece in order to do this . with respect to the united states , i think our role in nato , our support for the e . u . , as well as our willingness to take refugees so long as they are thoroughly vetted and that we have confidence from intelligence and other sources that they can come to our country , we should be doing our part . and we should back up the recent donors conference to make sure we have made our contribution to try to deal with the enormous cost that these refugees are posing to turkey and to members of the e . u . in particular . this is a humanitarian catastrophe . there is no other description of it . so we do as the united states have to support our friends , our allies in europe . we have to stand with them . we have to provide financial support to them . we have to provide the nato support to back up the mission that is going on . and we have to take properly vetted refugees ourselves . 
sanders absolutely . i think the secretary described the situation appropriately . you know , i don't go around asking for governor's resignations every day . in fact , i think i never have in my life . but i did ask for the resignation of governor snyder because his irresponsibility . . . . . . was so outrageous . what we are talking about are children being poisoned . that's what we're talking about . we don't know , no one knows for sure because they haven't done the appropriate studies , but there's no question that kids' intellectual development may have been impacted . we don't know how many thousands . the idea that there has not been a dramatic response is beyond comprehension . and when you have one of the , i think , significant public health crises of recent years , of course the federal government comes in . and of course the federal government says , you're not going to be poisoning little kids and impacting their entire lives . last point on this . and i suspect the secretary agrees . one wonders if this were a white suburban community what kind of response there would have been . flint , michigan , is a poor community . it is disproportionately african american and minority . and what has happened there is absolutely unacceptable . 
sanders i think president obama had the right idea , and the bottom line is that of course there have to be conditions . but , of course it doesn't do us any good to not talk with our adversaries . . . 
clinton number one , there are currently two hedge fund billionaires running ads against me here in new hampshire . they started in iowa . now , you'd have to ask yourself , why are they running ads against me ? and the answer is because they know i will go right after them , that i will not let their agenda be america's agenda . secondly , i think it's important to point out that about 3 percent of my donations come from people in the finance and investment world . you can go to opensecrets . org and check that . i have more donations from students and teachers than i do from people associated with wall street . now , number three and let me say this when governor o'malley was heading the democratic governors association , he had no trouble at all going to wall street to raise money to run campaigns for democratic governors . and he also had no trouble appointing an investment banker to be in charge of his consumer protection bureau when he was governor . so , you know , again , the difference between us and the republicans is night and day . and there is only one person on this stage who voted to take away authority from the sec and the commodities future trading commission that they could no longer regulate what are called swaps and derivatives , which actually contributed to the collapse of lehman brothers , and that was senator sanders . so if we're going to be talking like this , we can and maybe we can score some political points but the fact is every one of us stands for the kind of economy that will work better for every american . and if that means taking on wall street , i have a plan that is tough and comprehensive and praised by a lot of folks who say it goes further than what both senator sanders and governor o'malley are proposing . 
sanders well , this whole issue concerns me . and i agree with much of what the secretary and the governor have said . but let's be clear . today in america we have more people in jail than any other country on earth , 2 . 2 million people . predominantly african american and hispanic . we are spending 80 billion a year locking up our fellow americans . i think , and this is not easy , but i think we need to make wage a major effort , to come together as a country and end institutional racism . we need major , major reforms of a very broken criminal justice system . now , what does that mean ? well , for a start it means that police officers should not be shooting unarmed people , predominantly african americans . 
clinton i will do everything i can as president to get that accomplished . 
clinton i think after 11 hours , that's pretty clear , yes . and , you know , i do think it's important to do exactly what senator sanders said , and that is to start talking about the issues that the american people really care about , and that they talk to each of us about . and to contrast , even there are differences among us . you've heard some of those tonight . i still want to get back to health care , because i think that's a worthy topic to explore . but the differences among us pale compared to what's happening on the republican side . and if you listen to what they say and i had a chance over those 11 hours to watch and listen , as well as what i see in their debates they are putting forth alarming plans . i mean , all of us support funding planned parenthood . all of us believe climate change is real . all of us want equal pay for equal work . they don't believe in any of that . so let's focus on what this election is really going to be about . 
clinton after all , there are . . . crosstalk 
clinton i will look into it . i don't know the status , but i will certainly look into it . but , i can only repeat what is the fact that i spoke to a lot of different groups with a lot of different constituents , a lot of different kinds of members about issues that had to do with world affairs . i probably described more times than i can remember how stressful it was advising the president about going after bin laden . my view on this is look at my record . look at what i am proposing , andwe have a vigorous agreement here . we both want to reign in the excesses of wall street . i also want to reign in the excesses of johnson controls that we bailed out when they were an autoparts company , and we saved the auto industry , and now they want to avoid paying taxes . i want to go after the pharmaceutical companies like valeant , and turns that are increasing prices without any regard to the impact on people's health . now , if all we're going to talk about is one part of our economy , and indeed one streak in our economy , we're missing the big oil companies . we're missing other big energy companies . we're missing the big picture , and i have a record of trying to go at the problems that actually exist , and i will continue to do that . 
o'malley thank you . 
o'malley no , i've never made a promise like that . but unlike either of these two fine people , i've actually balanced a budget every single year . i was one i was the only one of only seven states that had a aaa bond rating . by the time i left , the average tax burden on maryland families was the same as when i started . but i did pass a more progressive income tax and asked the highest earning people to pay another 14 percent . david , look , this is the big i agree , by the way , that we should have paid family leave . and i agree with senator sanders on that . and just like social security and unlike the republicans , i think we should actually expand social security and increase average monthly benefits . but look , there's one big entitlement we can no longer afford as a country , and that is the entitlement that the super wealthy among us , those earning more than a million dollars , feel that they're entitled to pay lower income tax rates and a far lower preferred income tax rate when it comes to capital gains . if we were to raise the marginal rate to 45 percent for people earning more than a million dollars and if we tax capital gains essentially the same we do earnings from hard work and sweat and toil , you could generate 800 billion over the next ten years and that would do so much good for affordable college , debt free college , cutting youth unemployment in half , investing in our cities again . so the things i have done in office are the things that actually invest in growing our economy and making wages go up . that's the issue that we need to tackle as americans , and we can do it and we know how . 
sanders yes . 
o'malley andrea . . . 
sanders well , what i have said is that when you get i believe it is 225 , 000 for giving a speech , and she gave several speeches to goldman sachs , one of the wall street financial institutions whose greed and illegal behavior helped destroy our economy a number of years ago , when you get paid 225 , 000 , that means that that speech must have been an extraordinarily wonderful speech . 
clinton well , i would not ask anyone to vote for me based on my last name . i would ask them to listen to what i'm proposing , look at what i've accomplished in the senate , as secretary of of state , and then draw your own conclusion . i certainly am not campaigning to become president because my last name is clinton . i'm campaigning because i think i have the right combination of what the country needs , at this point , and i think i can take the fight to the republicans , because we cannot afford a republican to succeed barack obama as president of the united states . 
clinton no , well , i don't think i've changed my view on what we need to do to go from where we are , where the world is heavily dependent on coal and oil , but principally coal , to where we need to be , which is clean renewable energy , and one of the bridge fuels is natural gas . and so for both economic and environmental and strategic reasons , it was american policy to try to help countries get out from under the constant use of coal , building coal plants all the time , also to get out from under , especially if they were in europe , the pressure from russia , which has been incredibly intense . so we did say natural gas is a bridge . we want to cross that bridge as quickly as possible , because in order to deal with climate change , we have got to move as rapidly as we can . that's why i've set big goals . i want to see us deploy a half a billion more solar panels by the end of my first term and enough clean energy to provide electricity to every home in america within 10 years . so i have big , bold goals , but i know in order to get from where we are , where the world is still burning way too much coal , where the world is still too intimidated by countries and providers like russia , we have got to make a very firm but decisive move in the direction of clean energy . 
sanders well , i think the secretary has confused a lot of people . i don't know how you're there for the fight for 15 when you say you want a 12 an hour national minimum wage . now , in fact in fact , there is an effort , patty murray has introduced legislation for 12 minimum wage . that's good . i introduced legislation for 15 an hour minimum wage which is better . and ultimately what we have got to determine is after massive transfer of wealth from the middle class to the top 0 . 1 percent , when millions of our people are working longer hours for low wages . . . 
sanders if you listen , you know two points . number one , yes , 100 0 in the senate voted for democracy in libya and i would vote for that again . but that is very different from getting actively involved to overthrow and bring about regime change without fully understanding what the consequence of that regime change would be . second of all , i know you keep referring to barack obama all night here , but you in syria , you in syria talked about a no fly zone , which the president certainly does not support , nor do i support because , a , it will cost an enormous sum of money , second of all , it runs the risk of getting us sucked into perpetual warfare in that region . thirdly , when we talk about syria right now , no debate , like gadhafi , like saddam hussein , assad is another brutal murdering dictator , but right now our fight is to destroy isis first , and to get rid of assad second . 
clinton well , don , if i could , i think being a white person in the united states of america , i know that i have never had the experience that so many people , the people in this audience have had . and i think it's incumbent upon me and what i have been trying to talk about during this campaign is to urge white people to think about what it is like to have the talk with your kids , scared that your sons or daughters , even , could get in trouble for no good reason whatsoever like sandra bland and end up dead in a jail in texas . and i have spent a lot of time with the mothers of african american children who have lost them , trayvon martin's mother . and i've gotten to know them . i've listened to them . and it has been incredibly humbling because i can't pretend to have the experience that you have had and others have had . but i will do everything that i possibly can to not only do the best to understand and to empathize , but to tear down the barriers of systemic racism that are in the criminal justice system , in the employment system , in the education and health care system . that is what i will try to do to deal with what i know is the racism that still stalks our country . 
clinton well , ii don't accept that premise , chuck . i think that we've got so much business we have to do . we've talked a lot tonight about what we're againstwe're against income inequality . we're against the abuses of powerful interests . we're against a lot of things . i'm for a lot of things . i don't want to just stop bad things from happening , i want to start good things from happening . and i believe , if i'm so fortunate to get the nomination , i will begin to work immediately on putting together an agenda , beginning to talk with members of congress and others about how we can push forward . i want to have half a billion more solar panels deployed , the first four years . i want to have enough clean energy to power every home the next four years . i want us to keep working on the affordable care act , to get not only to 100 percent coverage , but bring down the costs of prescription drugs and out of pocket costs . i want to move forward on paid family leave , on early childhood education , i want us to do more for small businesses . small businesses have to create most of the jobs , and we're not creating and growing small businesses . i think , if you have a smart agenda , you pick the committees that you know have to begin to work on these various piecesbecause that's the way congress is set up . you go through different committees , and you really make a big push in the beginning . immigration reform , economic revitalization with manufacturing , with infrastructurewe put it out there , and we begin to work on an ambitious , big , bold agenda that will actually produce the results that i want to see for our country . 
o'malley i believe that we should never give up our privacy ; never should give up our freedoms in exchange for a promise of security . we need to figure this out together . we need a collaborative approach . we need new leadership . the way that things work in the modern era is actually to gather people around the table and figure these things out . the federal government should have to get warrants . that's not some sort of pass you know , antique sort of principle that safeguards our freedoms . but at the same time with new technologies i believe that the people creating these projects i mean these products also have an obligation to come together with law enforcement to figure these things out ; true to our american principles and values . my friend kashif , who is a doctor in maryland ; back to this issue of our danger as a democracy of turning against ourselves . he was putting his 10 and 12 year old boys to bed the other night . and he is a proud american muslim . and one of his little boys said to him , dad , what happens if donald trump wins and we have to move out of our homes ? these are very , very real issues . this is a clear and present danger in our politics within . we need to speak to what unites us as a people ; freedom of worship , freedom of religion , freedom of expression . and we should never be convinced to give up those freedoms in exchange for a promise of greater security ; especially from someone as untried and as incompetent as donald trump . 
clinton well , look , i think that , as senator sanders said about what i said , i will say about what he said . i think that we recognize that we have a set of problems that we cannot ignore and we must address . and that is why i have been promoting for my entire adult life , i think , the idea of investing early in kids , early childhood education , universal pre k , like what mayor de blasio brought to new york . we have got to help more kids get off to a good start . that's why i want a good teacher in a good school for every child , regardless of the zip code that child lives in . . . 
clinton well , i have what i call the new college compact . because i think everybody has to have some skin in this game , you know . number one , states have been dis investing in higher education . in fact , i think new hampshire , in state tuition for public colleges and universities , is among the highest if not the highest in the country . so states over a period of decades have put their money elsewhere ; into prisons , into highways , into things other than higher education . so under my compact , the federal government will match money that the states begin to put back in to the higher education system . secondly , i don't believe in free tuition for everybody . i believe we should focus on middle class families , working families , and poor kids who have the ambition and the talent to go to college and get ahead . so i have proposed debt free tuition , which i think is affordable and i would move a lot of the pell grant and other aid into the arena where it could be used for living expense . so i put all of this together , again , on my website and i've gotten such a good response . but i want to quickly say , one of the areas that senator sanders touched on in talking about education and certainly talking about health care is his commitment to really changing the systems . free college , a single payer system for health and it's been estimated we're looking at 18 to 20 trillion , about a 40 percent in the federal budget . and i have looked at his proposed plans for health care for example , and it really does transfer every bit of our health care system including private health care , to the states to have the states run . and i think we've got to be really thoughtful about how we're going to afford what we proposed , which is why everything that i have proposed i will tell you exactly how i'm going to pay for it ; including college . 
sanders last year's . 
clinton and that is one of the many reasons we must all support president obama's right to nominate a successor to justice scalia and demand that the senate hold hearings and a vote on that successor because there are so many issues at stake . on the first day of my campaign , i said , we are going to reverse citizens united . and if we can't get it done through the court , i will lead a constitutional amendment effort to reverse it that way . 
sanders well , that's what our campaign is about . it is thinking big . it is understanding that in the wealthiest country in the history of the world , we should have health care for every man , woman , and child as a right that we should raise the minimum wage to at least 15 an hour ; that we have got to create millions of decent paying jobs by rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure . so , what my first days are about is bringing america together , to end the decline of the middle class , to tell the wealthiest people in this country that yes , they are going to start paying their fair share of taxes , and that we are going to have a government that works for all of us , and not just big campaign contributors . 
clinton if the united states does not lead , there is not another leader . there is a vacuum . 
clinton there's plenty of problems that we all have to face together . and the final thing i would say , we're at least having a vigorous debate about reining in wall street . . . 
sanders yes . 
clinton i think we're missing the point here . we are doing both at the same time . 
sanders well , first of all , i disagree with that study . there are many economists who come up with very , very different numbers . for example , we are the only country , major country on earth , that does not guarantee health care to all people , and yet we end up spending almost three times what the british do , 50 percent more than the french . my proposal , a medicare for all , single payer program , will save . . . . . . will save middle class families many thousands of dollars a year in their health care costs . public colleges and universities tuition free ? damn right . that is exactly what we should be doing . and i'd pay for that i'd pay for that by telling wall street that , yeah , we are going to have a tax on wall street speculation , which will bring in more than enough money to provide free tuition at public colleges and universities and lower the outrageous level of student debt . wolf , we have seen in the last 30 years a massive transfer of wealth from the middle class to the top 0 . 1 percent . the establishment does not like this idea , but , yes , i am determined to transfer that money back to the working families of this country . 
sanders thank you . as we honor the extraordinary life of dr . martin luther king jr . , it's important not only that we remember what he stood for , but that we pledge to continue his vision to transform our country . as we look out at our country today , what the american people understand is we have an economy that's rigged , that ordinary americans are working longer hours for lower wages , 47 million people living in poverty , and almost all of the new income and wealth going to the top one percent . and then , to make a bad situation worse , we have a corrupt campaign finance system where millionaires and billionaires are spending extraordinary amounts of money to buy elections . this campaign is about a political revolution to not only elect the president , but to transform this country . 
o'malley john , i would disagree with secretary clinton respectfully on this score . this actually is america's fight . it cannot solely be america's fight . america is best when we work in collaboration with our allies . america is best when we are actually standing up to evil in this world . and isis , make no mistake about it , is an evil in this world . isis has brought down a russian airliner . isis has now attacked a western democracy in in france . and we do have a role in this . not solely ours , but we must work collaboratively with other nations . the great failing of these last 10 or 15 years , john , has been our failing of human intelligence on the ground . our role in the world is not to roam the globe looking for new dictators to topple . our role in the world is to make ourselves a beacon of hope . make ourselves stronger at home , but also our role in the world , yes , is also to confront evil when it rises . we took out the safe haven in afghanistan , but now there is , undoubtedly , a larger safe haven and we must rise to this occasion in collaboration and with alliances to confront it , and invest in the future much better human intelligence so we know what the next steps are . 
sanders there is nobody in the united states congress who has taken on the koch brothers , who want to destroy social security , medicare , medicaid , and virtually every federal program passed since the 1930s more that bernie sanders . and i am proud that the gentleman who is head of goldman sachs , now , he didn't give me 225 , 000 for speaking fees , he said i was dangerous and he's right . i am dangerous for wall street . 
sanders let me just . . . 
clinton wait a minute . i just think it's worth pointing out that the leaders of the fossil fuel industry , the koch brothers , have just paid to put up an ad praising senator sanders . there are a lot of different powerful interests in washington . i've taken them on . i took on the drug companies . i took on the insurance companies . before there was something called obamacare , there was something called hillarycare , and i worked really hard . . . . . . to get comprehensive health care reform , and they beat me . so i have a long record of standing up to special interests . and i will continue to do so . 
clinton this is the election . . . 
clinton well , first of all , i . . . 
sanders well , i'm not going to comment on the benghazi tragedy , but i will say this . a series of articles in the new york times talked about secretary clinton's role in urging the administration to go forward with regime change , getting rid of gadhafi in libya . gadhafi was a brutal dictator , there's no question . but one of the differences between the secretary and i is i'm not quite so aggressive with regard to regime change . i voted against the war in iraq because i had a fear of what would happen the day after . and secretary clinton talks about henry kissinger . . . 
sanders and let's talk about judgment . and let us talk about the worst foreign policy blunder in the modern history of this country . . . i led the opposition to that war . secretary clinton voted for that . well , let's talk about judgment . let's talk about super pacs and 501 c 4 s , money which is completely undisclosed . where does the money come from ? do we really feel confident about a candidate saying that she's going to bring change in america when she is so dependent on big money interests ? i don't think so . 
sanders yes . 
o'malley we can do it . 
o'malley . . . and a lot of the xenophobes , the immigrant haters like some that we've heard like , donald trump , that carnival barker in the republican party . . . 
sanders thank you thank you all very much . i'm running for president of the united states because given the crises facing our country , it is just too late for establishment politics and establishment economics . together we're going to have to overturn this disastrous citizens united supreme court decision . billionaires and wall street should not be buying elections . we've got to end this rigged economy where people are working longer hours for low wages , almost all new income and wealth going to the top 1 percent , and of course , we need comprehensive immigration reform and a path toward citizenship . and here in miami . . . . . . here in miami as much as any city in america , we know that we have got to combat climate change , transform our energy system , and leave this planet in a way that is healthy and habitable for our kids and our grandchildren . 
sanders well , i think , judy , what has to be appreciated is that , as a result of the disastrous and illegal behavior on wall street , millions of lives were hurt . people lost their jobs , their homes , their life savings . turns out that the african american community and the latino community were hit especially hard . as i understand it , the african american community lost half of their wealth as a result of the wall street collapse . so when you have childhood african american poverty rates of 35 percent , when you have youth unemployment at 51 percent , when you have unbelievable rates of incarceration which , by the way , leaves the children back home without a dad or even a mother clearly , we are looking at institutional racism . we are looking at an economy in which the rich get richer and the poor get poorer . and sadly , in america today , in our economy , a whole lot of those poor people are african american . 
sanders who said that think we should normalize relations with iran tomorrow ? i never said that . i think we should move forward as quickly as we can . and you're right . they are a sponsor of terrorism around the world and we have to address that . but you know , a number of years ago , people were saying normal relationship with cuba , what a bad and silly idea . they're communists , they are our enemy . well guess what ? change has come . so please don't suggest that i think we normalize relations with tehran tomorrow . we don't . but i would like to see us move forward , and hopefully some day that will happen . and i would say if i might , madam secretaryand you can correct me if i'm wrong . when you ran against senator obama you thought him naive because he thought it was a good idea to talk to our enemies . i think those are exactly the people you have to talk to and you have to negotiate with . 
clinton that is exactly what i just said and what i just described . 
sanders let us support a tax on carbon . . . 
o'malley . . . and to do more of them to reform our criminal justice system . 
sanders i think the secretary and i mostly , i think , agree on this issue . look , in this country , immigration reform is a very hot debate . it's divided the country . but i would hope very much , that as we have that debate , we do not , as donald trump and others have done , resort to racism and xenophobia and bigotry . this idea of suddenly , one day or maybe a night , rounding up 11 million people and taking them outside of this country is a vulgar , absurd idea that i would hope very few people in america support . 
clinton well , don't don't put words . . . 
sanders i know what secretary clinton is saying . 
o'malley yes , actually , i believe what she said was that there's a lot of policies that have led to this unrest . but , anderson , when i ran for mayor of baltimore in 1999 . . . 
sanders absolutely . 
sanders i'm sorry . please say that . . . 
clinton well , make make no mistake about it , this is not just an attack on me , it's an attack on president obama . president obama . . . booing you know , let me tell you why . you may not like the answer , but i'll tell you why . president obama had a super pac when he ran . president obama took tens of millions of dollars from contributors . and president obama was not at all influenced when he made the decision to pass and sign dodd frank , the toughest regulations . . . . . . on wall street in many a year . so this is this is a phony this is a phony attack that is designed to raise questions when there is no evidence or support , to undergird the continuation that he is putting forward in these attacks . 
sanders i believe i was . . . crosstalk 
o'malley what these chaldean families told me was that their families in syria , when isis moves into their town , they actually paint a red cross across the door and mark their homes for demolition , and that tells the family you'd better get out now . the sort of genocide and brutality that the victims are suffering , these are not the perpetrators . we need to be the nation whose enduring symbol is the statue of liberty , and we need to act like the great country we are , according to our values . 
sanders did you ask me to speak ? 
clinton no , of course not . of course not . this is this is a serious difference between us . laughter and what i want to start by saying it's not a laughing matter 90 people on average a day are killed or commit suicide or die in accidents from guns , 33 , 000 people a year . i take it really seriously , because i have spent more time than i care to remember being with people who have lost their loved ones . so , yes , we have a problem in america . we need a president who will stand up against the gun lobby . we need a president who will fight for commonsense gun safety reforms . and what we have here is a big difference . senator sanders voted against the brady bill five times . he voted for the most important nra priority , namely giving immunity from liability to gun makers and dealers , something that is at the root of a lot of the problems that we are facing . then he doubled down on that in the new york daily news interview , when asked whether he would support the sandy hook parents suing to try to do something to rein in the advertising of the ar 15 , which is advertised to young people as being a combat weapon , killing on the battlefield . he said they didn't deserve their day in court . i could not disagree more . and , finally , this is the only industry in america , the only one . that has this kind of special protection . we hear a lot from senator sanders about the greed and recklessness of wall street , and i agree . we've got to hold wall street accountable . . . 
clinton well , look , i won one of the contests and lost another close one . i am continuing to work hard for every single vote across our country . i was pleased that i got 100 , 000 more votes last night than my opponent and more delegates . so this is a marathon , and it's a marathon that can only be carried out by the kind of inclusive campaign that i'm running , a campaign that reaches out to everybody , a campaign that offers real positive solutions to the problems that we face , a campaign that is based on how together we can make progress , because i am a progressive who likes to get things done . so i'm excited about the upcoming contests , including right here in florida . and we'll continue to work as hard as i can to earn the vote of every single voter . 
clinton well , thank you very much to cbs and everyone here this evening for giving us another chance to appear before you . i've heard a lot about me in this debate , and i'm going to keep talking and thinking about all of you because ultimately , i think the president's job is to do everything possible , everything that she can do to lift up the people of this country . starting with our children and moving forward . i've spent my entire life , since i started as a young lawyer for the children's defense fund , trying to figure out how we can even the odds for so many people in america , this great country of ours , who are behind , who don't have a chance . and that's what i will do as your president . i will work my heart out . i need your help . all of you in iowa , i need you to caucus for me . please go to hillaryclinton . com and be part of making this country what we know it can and should be . 
clinton . . . with senator sanders eight . . . crosstalk . . . times . 
clinton well , i certainly know what all americans need , and that is more jobs , with rising incomes . it's something that i have worked on for many years . it's why i've laid down the only really comprehensive plan about how to create more good jobs . and there are several things that need to be addressed . we do have to do more infrastructure spending . that will put many americans to work . it's a good job that gets you on the ladder to the middle class . we need to improve the conditions for manufacturing in our country and punish those companies that want to export jobs . we need them to be incentivized to create jobs right here in america . we also do have to combat climate change , and no state has more at stake in that than florida . and the best way to do that is not only enforcing the laws we have , but also the clean power plan that president obama has put forth that i support , and the paris agreement that i think was a huge step forward in the world , that senator sanders said was too weak , but i helped to lay the groundwork for that . but we need more clean energy jobs and we have to do more to help small businesses . you know , the fastest growing segment of small businesses are minority and women owned small business , and we need to help businesses get started . the very distinguished congresswoman from new york who's been on the small business committee , congresswoman velasquez , knows exactly what we need to be doing to create more small businesses . we do need to raise the minimum wage and we have to guarantee equal pay for women . 
sanders of course not . this was a large and complicated bill . there were provisions in it that i think made sense . for example , do i think that a gun shop in the state of vermont that sells legally a gun to somebody , and that somebody goes out and does something crazy , that that gun shop owner should be held responsible ? i don't . on the other hand , where you have manufacturers and where you have gun shops knowingly giving guns to criminals or aiding and abetting that , of course we should take action . 
sanders . . . where people like senator bayh and ron wyden , byron dorgan . . . 
clinton i think i think it's fair to say we don't have a disagreement . we both believe there has to be more money going into the social security system . i've said i'm looking at a couple of different ways , one which you mentioned , senator , but also trying to expand the existing tax to passive income that wealthy people have so that we do get more revenue into the social security trust fund . i have a slightly different approach , though , about what we should do with that initially . first , rather than expand benefits for everyone , i do want to take care of low income seniors who worked at low wage jobs . i want to take care of women . when the social security program was started in the 1930s , not very many women worked . and women have been disadvantaged ever since . they do not get any credit for their care taking responsibilities . and the people who are often the most hard hit are widows , because when their spouse dies , they can lose up to one half of their social security monthly payment . so we have no disagreement about the need to buttress social security , get more revenue into the program . but i want to start by helping those people who are most at risk , the ones who , yes , are cutting their pills in half , who don't believe they can make the rent , who are worried about what comes next for them . 
sanders let's talklet's talk about issues , all right ? let's talk about why , in the 1990s , wall street got deregulated . did it have anything to do with the fact that wall street providedspent billions of dollars on lobbying and campaign contributions ? well , some people might think , yeah , that had some influence . laughter let's ask why it is that we pay , by far , the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs , and your medicine can be doubled tomorrow , and there's nothing that the government can do to stop it . you think it has anything to do with the huge amounts of campaign contributions and lobbying from the fossil fuel industry ? let's talk about climate change . do you think there's a reason why not one republican has the guts to recognize that climate change is real , and that we need to transform our energy system ? do you think it has anything to do with the koch brothers and exxonmobil pouring huge amounts of money into the political system ? that is what goes on in america . i am noti like . . . . . . there is a reason . you know , there is a reason why these people are putting huge amounts of money into our political system . and in my view , it is undermining american democracy and it is allowing congress to represent wealthy campaign contributors and not the working families of this country . 
sanders and universities . 
sanders i was not the secretary of state . . . 
clinton . . . issues they have to respond to . 
clinton well , you know , both bill and i have been very blessed . neither of us came from wealthy families and we've worked really hard our entire lives . and i want to make sure every single person in this country has the same opportunities that he and i have had , to make the most of their god given potential and to have the chances that they should have in america for a good education , good job training , and then good jobs . i have a five point economic plan , because this inequality challenge we face , we have faced it at other points . it's absolutely right . it hasn't been this bad since the 1920s . but if you look at the republicans versus the democrats when it comes to economic policy , there is no comparison . the economy does better when you have a democrat in the white house and that's why we need to have a democrat in the white house in january 2017 . 
o'malley lester , i inaudible 
chafee did you hear what i said ? on the issues . i have not changed on the issues . i was a liberal republican , then i was an independent , and now i'm a proud democrat . but i have not changed on the issues . and i open my record to scrutiny . whether it's on the environment , a woman's right to choose , gay marriage , fiscal responsibility , aversion to foreign entanglements , using the tools of government to help the less fortunate . time and time again , i have never changed . you're looking at a block of granite when it comes to the issues . so i have not changed . 
sanders yes , i apologize . 
sanders all right , look , secretary clinton wants everybody else to release it , well , i'm your democratic opponent , i release it , here it is . there ain't nothing . i don't give speeches to wall street for hundreds of thousands of dollars , you got it . second of all , when we talk about being tough on wall street , and this galls me and the american people . recently goldman sachs , among many other major financial institutions on wall street , as you know , reached a settlement with the federal government for 5 billion because they were selling worthless packages of subprime mortgages , 5 billion settlement . you know how many people , executives on wall street have gone to jail ? if you are a kid caught with marijuana in michigan , you get a police record . if you are an executive on wall street that destroys the american economy , you pay a 5 billion fine , no police record . if i am elected president , we are going to bring justice back to a broken criminal justice system . 
sanders well , you know , a general election is different than a primary and caucus process . but let me just say this . in terms of where we are right now , as you mention , rachel , in a number of national and state , including new hampshire . for example , the last poll i sawthere may have been a new onelast one i saw here in new hampshire , a battleground state , had me defeating trump by 19 ; the secretary defeating him by one . there were also pretty large margins in iowa and wisconsin . these are polls . polls go up . polls go down . but here's why i think i will be , if nominated , the strongest candidate . democrats win when there is a large voter turnout ; when people are excited ; when working people , middle class people and young people are prepared to engage in the political process . republicans win when people are demoralized and you have a small voter turnout , which by the way is why they love voter suppression . i believe that our campaign up to now has shown that we can create an enormous amount of enthusiasm from working people , from young people , who will get involved in the political process and which will drive us to a very large voter turnout . if there is a large voter turnout , not only do we retain the white house , but i think we regain the senate . we win governors' chairs up and down the line . so i believe if you want to retain the white house , if you want to see democrats do well across the board , i think our campaign is the one that creates the large voter turnout and helps us win . 
clinton you know , it does take me a little longer . that's all i can say . 
sanders i find i mean , it's just a very different , you know , historical perspective here . kissinger was one of those people during the vietnam era who talked about the domino theory . not everybody remembers that . you do . i do . the domino theory , you know , if vietnam goes , china , da , da , da , da , da , da , da . that's what he talked about , the great threat of china . and then , after the war , this is the guy who , in fact , yes , you're right , he opened up relations with china , and now pushed various type of trade agreements , resulting in american workers losing their jobs as corporations moved to china . the terrible , authoritarian , communist dictatorship he warned us about , now he's urging companies to shut down and move to china . not my kind of guy . 
o'malley thank you . my name is martin o'malley , i was born the year dr . king delivered his i have a dream speech . and i want to thank the people of south carolina , not only for hosting our debate here tonight , but also for what you taught all of us in the aftermath of the tragic shooting at mother emanuel church . you taught us , in fact , in keeping with dr . king's teaching , that love would have the final word when you took down the confederate flag from your state house ; let go of the past and move forward . eight years ago , you brought forward a new leader in barack obama to save our country from the second great depression . and that's what he's done . our country's doing better , we're creating jobs again . but in order to make good on the promise of equal opportunity and equal justice under the law , and we have urgent work to do , and the voices of anger and fear and division that we've heard coming off of the republican presidential podiums are pretty loud . we need new leadership . we need to come together as a people and build on the good things that president obama has done . that's why i'm running for president . i need your help , i ask for your vote , and i look forward to moving our country forward once again . thank you . 
sanders you'll get them , yes . yeah , look , i don't want to get anybody very excited . they are very boring tax returns . no big money from speeches , no major investments . unfortunately unfortunately , i remain one of the poorer members of the united states senate . and that's what that will show . 
clinton you know , i think , again , both of us share the goal of trying to make college affordable for all young americans . and i have set forth a compact that would do just that for debt free tuition . we differ , however , on a couple of key points . one of them being that if you don't have some agreement within the system from states and from families and from students , it's hard to get to where we need to go . and senator sanders's plan really rests on making sure that governors like scott walker contribute 23 billion on the first day to make college free . i am a little skeptical about your governor actually caring enough about higher education to make any kind of commitment like that . 
o'malley didn't just happen . 
sanders this is what i think this is what many economists believe that one of the reasons that real unemployment in this country is 10 percent , one of the reasons that african american youth unemployment and underemployment is 51 percent is the average worker in america doesn't have any disposable income . you have no disposable income when you are make 10 , 12 bucks an hour . when we put money into the hands of working people , they're going to go out and buy goods , they're going to buy services and they're going to create jobs in doing that . kathie , that is the kind of economy i believe , put money in the hands of working people , raise the minimum wage to 15 buck an hour . 
clinton yeah . yeah . 
sanders excuse me . 
sanders off mike i fully , fully concede that secretary clinton , who was secretary of state for four years , has more experiencehat is not arguablein foreign affairs . but experience is not the only point , judgment is . and once again , back in 2002 , when we both looked at the same evidence about the wisdom of the war in iraq , one of us voted the right way and one of us didn't . in terms of iran and in terms of saudi arabia , of course they hate each other . that's no great secret . but john kerry , who is i think doing a very good job , has tried to at least get these people in the room together because both of them are being threatened by isis . 
webb may i ? people are going back and forth here for 10 minutes here . there are people at high levels in this government who have bodyguards 24 hours a day , seven days a week . the average american does not have that , and deserves the right to be able to protect their family . 
sanders well , first of all , let's remember where we were when bush left office . we were losing 800 , 000 jobs a month . and i know my republican friends seem to have some amnesia on this issue , but the world's financial crisis was on the world's financial markets system was on the verge of collapse . that's where we were . are we better off today than we were then ? absolutely . but the truth is that for the 40 years , the great middle class of this country has been disappearing . and in my view what we need to do is create millions of jobs by rebuilding our crumbling infrastructure ; raise the minimum wage to 15 an hour ; pay equity for women workers ; and our disastrous trade policies , which have cost us millions of jobs ; and make every public college and university in this country tuition free . 
sanders . . . that's what we need all over this country . and , let me be very honest with you , hard thing to say , but it is true . a great nation is judged not by how many millionaires and billionaires it has , but by how it treats the most vulnerable amongst us , and that is the children , and that is the elderly . and , do you know what ? we should be ashamed of how we treat our kids and our senior citizens . 
sanders where secretary clinton and i think , i agree with most of what she said . but where i think we do have an honest disagreement , is that in the incredible quagmire of syria , where it's hard to know who's fighting who and if you give arms to this guy , it may end up in isis' hand the next day . we all know that . and we all know , no argument , the secretary is absolutely right , assad is a butcher of his own people , man using chemical weapons against his own people . this is beyond disgusting . but i think in terms of our priorities in the region , our first priority must be the destruction of isis . our second priority must be getting rid of assad , through some political settlement , working with iran , working with russia . but the immediate task is to bring all interests together who want to destroy isis , including russia , including iran , including our muslim allies to make that the major priority . 
sanders no , what i am suggesting is that we have a corrupt campaign finance system . and instead of standing up to that finance system . . . and instead of standing up to that finance system , secretary clinton has super pac , which is raising huge amounts well , i hate to say the word huge , every time i say huge it . . . laughter a lot of money from wall street and from the fossil fuel industry . i am doing it a different way . i have 5 million individual contributors who have gone to berniesanders . com to make a 27 contribution . i don't take money from the fossil fuel industry . 
o'malley and we did it by leading with principle , not by pandering to the nra and backing down to the nra . 
webb and i would say this . i've been waiting for 10 minutes . i will say this . 
clinton . . . and 85 percent of gun owners agree . 
sanders yes . you know you know , one of the differences look , secretary clinton and i've said this before , and i admit it she has the support of all the governors democratic all the senators , all the congressmen . i don't . i am not part of that establishment . i plead guilty . i happen to be a member of the environmental committee . i have talked to scientists all over the world . and what they are telling me if we don't get our act together , this planet could be 5 to 10 degrees warmer by the end of this century cataclysmic problems for this planet . this is a national crisis . and i talk to scientists who tell me that fracking is doing terrible things to water systems all over this country . we have gotta be bold now . we gotta transform our energy system to energy efficiency and sustainable energy . we've gotta do it yesterday . 
sanders hold it . 
clinton . . . that will actually agree . . . 
clinton absolutely i can . you know , before it was emails , it was benghazi , and the republicans were stirring up so much controversy about that . and i testified for 11 hours , answered their questions . they basically said yeah , didn't get her . we tried . that was all a political ploy . now , we had a development in the email matter today when it came out that secretary powell and close aides to former secretary rice used private e mail accounts . and now you have these people in the government who are doing the same thing to secretary powell and secretary rice's aide they've been doing to me , which is that i never sent or received any classified material . they are retroactively classifying it . i agree completely with secretary powell , who said today this is an absurdity . and so i think the american people will know it's an absurdity . i have absolutely no concerns about it whatsoever . 
sanders the key issue here was whether the united states should go around overthrowing small latin american countries . i think that that was a mistake . . . 
o'malley that's right . 
sanders . . . excuse me . . . 
clinton kevin , if i could just jump in . i i believe that we should make community college free . we should have debt free college if you go to a public college or university . you should not have to borrow a dime to pay tuition . i want to use pell grants to help defray the living expenses that often make a difference , whether a young person can stay in school or not . i disagree with free college for everybody . i don't think taxpayers should be paying to send donald trump's kids to college . i think it ought to be a compact families contribute , kids contribute . and together we make it possible for a new generation of young people to refinance their debt and not come out with debt in the future . 
sanders well , one of us ran against barack obama . i was not that candidate . all right , look , this has been a great debate . a lot of interesting issues have come together . let me conclude by just saying this . there is no president , in my view , not hillary clinton , not bernie sanders , who has the capability or the power to take on wall street , large campaign donors , the corporate media , the big money interests in this country alone . this campaign is not just about electing a president . what this campaign is about is creating a process for a political revolution in which millions of americans , working people who have given up on the political process , they don't think anybody hears their pains or their concerns . young people for whom getting involved in politics is as , you know , it's like going to the moon . it ain't going to happen . low income people who are not involved in the political process . what this campaign is not only about electing someone who has the most progressive agenda , it is about bringing tens of millions of people together to demand that we have a government that represents all of us and not just the 1 percent , who today have so much economic and political power . thank you all very much . 
sanders rachel , thank you very much . millions of americans are giving up on the political process . and they're giving up on the political process because they understand the economy is rigged . they are working longer hours for low wages . they're worried about the future of their kids , and yet almost all new income and wealth is going to the top 1 percent . not what america is supposed to be about . not the fairness that we grew up believing that america was about . and then sustaining that rigged economy is a corrupt campaign finance system undermining american democracy , where billionaire , wall street , corporate america can contribute unlimited sums of money into super pacs and into candidates . our job , together , is to end a rigged economy , create an economy that works for all , and absolutely overturn citizens united . one person , one vote . that's what american democracy is about . 
sanders first of all , we recognize that we have a rigged economy , as you've indicated . middle class in this country for the last 40 years has been disappearing ; are we better off today than we were when bush left office ? absolutely . but as you've indicated for millions of american workers , people in new hampshire all over america , they're working longer hours for lower wages deeply worried about their kids . so what do we do ? first statement is , we tell the billionaire class , they cannot have it all . for a start , they're going to start to pay their fair share of taxes . second of all what we do , is you raise the minimum wage to living wage , 15 bucks an hour over the next several years . next thing we do , pay equity for women workers . women should not be making 79 cents on the dollar compared to that . next thing that we do , real unemployment official unemployment , 5 percent , real employment 10 percent , youth unemployment , off the charts . we rebuild our crumbling infrastructure , our roads our bridges , our rail systems , we create 13 million jobs with a trillion dollar investment . furthermore , in a competitive global economy , it is imperative that we have the best educated workforce in the world . that is why i'm going to have a tax on wall street speculation to make certain that public colleges and universities in america are tuition free . 
clinton well , our prayers are with the people of france tonight , but that is not enough . we need to have a resolve that will bring the world together to root out the kind of radical jihadist ideology that motivates organizations like isis , a barbaric , ruthless , violent jihadist terrorist group . this election is not only about electing a president . it's also about choosing our next commander in chief . and i will be laying out in detail , what i think we need to do with our friends and allies in europe and elsewhere to do a better job of coordinating efforts against the scourge of terrorism . our country deserves no less , because all of the other issues we want to deal with depend upon us being secure and strong . 
clinton well . . . 
sanders let me give you an example of how corrupt how corrupt this system is . goldman sachs recently fined 5 billion . goldman sachs has given this country two secretaries of treasury , one on the republicans , one under democrats . 
clinton well , it is true that now that the spotlight is pretty bright here in new york , some things have been said and senator sanders did call me unqualified . i've been called a lot of things in my life . that was a first . laughter and then he did say that . . . . . . he had to question my judgment . well , the people of new york voted for me twice to be their senator from new york and . . . . . . and . . . . . . and president obama trusted my judgment enough to ask me to be secretary of state for the united states . so , look , we have disagreements on policy . there's no doubt about it . but if you go and read , which i hope all of you will before tuesday , senator sanders' long interview with the new york daily news , talk about judgment and talk about the kinds of problems he had answering questions about even his core issue , breaking up the banks . when asked , he could not explain how . . . laughter . . . that would be done and . . . . . . when asked . . . . . . when asked about a number of foreign policy issues , he could not answer about afghanistan , about israel , about counterterrorism , except to say if he'd had some paper in front of him , maybe he could . i think you need to have the judgment on day one to be both president and commander in chief . 
clinton your profusion of comments about your feelings towards president obama are a little strange given what you said about him in 2011 . but look , i have a plan that most commentators have said is tougher , more effective , and more comprehensive . 
clinton well , we've got to have a public discussion , because we have created a culture in which people grab for guns all the time . 
webb i believe that the signal that we sent to the region when the iran nuclear deal was concluded was that we are accepting iran's greater position on this very important balance of power , among our greatest ally israel , and the sunnis represented by the saudi regime , and iran . it was a position of weakness and i think it encouraged the acts that we've seen in the past several weeks . 
clinton go as quickly as . . . crosstalk . . . to get to 15 . 
sanders i've got to admit . . . 
clinton . . . and they basically went to the congress i was there . 
sanders well , that's not quite accurate . i did give a speech at georgetown where i talked about democratic socialism and foreign policy . maybe i shouldn't have combined the two in the same speech , because the foreign policy part of it didn't get much attention . so , let me take this opportunity to give you a very short speech here on the issue . i think , while it is true that the secretary and i voted differently on the war in iraq , what is important is that we learn the lesson of the war in iraq . and that lesson is intrinsic to my foreign policy if elected president , is the united states cannot do it alone . we cannot be the policeman of the world . we are now spending more i believe than the next eight countries on defense . we have got to work in strong coalition with the major powers of the world and with those muslim countries that are prepared to stand up and take on terrorism . so i would say that the key doctrine of the sanders administration would be no , we cannot continue to do it alone ; we need to work in coalition . crosstalk 
clinton well , i'm just not sure i agree completely with that assessment . i think under president obama we have seen a lot of advances , the affordable care act has helped more african americans than any other group to get insurance , to be taken care of , but we also know a lot more than we did . we have a lot more social media , we have everybody with a cellphone . so , we are seeing the dark side of the remaining systemic racism that we have to root out in our society . i think president obama has set a great example . i think he has addressed a lot of these issues that have been quite difficult , but he has gone forward . now , what we have to do is to build on an honest conversation about where we go next . we now have much more information about what must be done to fix our criminal justice system . we now have some good models about how better to provide employment , housing and education . i think what president obama did was to exemplify the importance of this issue as our first african american president , and to address it both from the president's office , and through his advocacy , such as working with young men , and mrs . obama's work with young women . but , we can't rest . we have work to do , and we now know a lot more than we ever did before . so , it's going to be my responsibility to make sure we move forward to solve these problems that are now out in the open . nobody can deny them . to use the justice department , as we just saw , they have said they are going to sue ferguson , that entered into a consent agreement , and then tried to back out . so , we're going to enforce the law , we're going to change policing practices , we're going to change incarceration practices , but we're also going to emphasize education , jobs , and housing . 
clinton i will stay in nato . i will stay in nato , and we will continue to look for missions and other kinds of programs that they will support . remember , nato was with us in afghanistan . most of the member countries also lost soldiers and civilians in afghanistan . they came to our rallying defense after 9 11 . that meant a lot . and , yes , we have to work out the financial aspects of it , but let's not forget what's really happening . with russia being more aggressive , making all kinds of intimidating moves toward the baltic countries , we've seen what they've done in eastern ukraine , we know how they want to rewrite the map of europe , it is not in our interests . think of how much it would cost if russia's aggression were not deterred because nato was there on the front lines making it clear they could not move forward . 
sanders i'm sorry ? 
clinton well , i've taken responsibility for it . i did say it was a mistake . what i did was allowed by the state department , but it wasn't the best choice . and i have been as transparent as i know to be , turning over 55 , 000 pages of my e mails , asking that they be made public . and you're right . i am going to be testifying . i've been asking to testify for some time and to do it in public , which was not originally agreed to . but let's just take a minute here and point out that this committee is basically an arm of the republican national committee . it is a partisan vehicle , as admitted by the house republican majority leader , mr . mccarthy , to drive down my poll numbers . big surprise . and that's what they have attempted to do . i am still standing . i am happy to be part of this debate . and i intend to keep talking about the issues that matter to the american people . you know , i believe strongly that we need to be talking about what people talk to me about , like how are we going to make college affordable ? how are we going to pay down student debt ? 
clinton well but but . . . 
sanders yes . 
sanders inaudible have as much time as she just had . 
clinton it builds on the dodd frank yes , it is . it builds on the dodd frank , regulatory scheme . . . 
sanders there comes a time there comes a time when if we pursue justice and peace , we are going to have to say that netanyahu is not right all of the time . 
o'malley martha , may i martha , may i . . . crosstalk 
sanders can i just say this . . . 
clinton you know , i don't support it when any locality or any state is against it , number one . i don't support it when the release of methane or contamination of water is present . i don't support it number three unless we can require that anybody who fracks has to tell us exactly what chemicals they are using . so by the time we get through all of my conditions , i do not think there will be many places in america where fracking will continue to take place . and i think that's the best approach , because right now , there places where fracking is going on that are not sufficiently regulated . so first , we've got to regulate everything that is currently underway , and we have to have a system in place that prevents further fracking unless conditions like the ones that i just mentioned are met . 
clinton absolutely , although it happens before i am president if i am so fortunate to be . i have been calling for months that the congress must give authority to puerto rico to restructure its debts . just like it has enabled states and cities to restructure their debt . and it's a grave injustice for the congress , led by the republicans to be refusing to enact that opportunity within the bankruptcy law . and what we see in puerto rico now is a lot of suffering . we see schools being closed , we see health care being denied and we see a thousand puerto rican families a month moving to the united states , mostly to florida . puerto ricans are citizen of america . they deserve to be treated as citizens and to be given the opportunity to get back on their feet economically . and i just want to add one thing to the question you were asking senator sanders . i think in that same interview , he praised what he called the revolution of values in cuba and talked about how people were working for the common good , not for themselves . i just couldn't disagree more . you know , if the values are that you oppress people , you disappear people , you imprison people or even kill people for expressing their opinions , for expressing freedom of speech , that is not the kind of revolution of values that i ever want to see anywhere . 
sanders well , i was chairman for two years , and when i was chairman we did take action . what we did is pass a 15 billion dollar piece of legislation which brought in many , many new doctors , and nurses into the v . a . so that veterans in this country could get the health care when they needed it , and not be on long waiting lines . and , the other part of that legislation said that if a veteran is living more than 40 miles away from a v . a . facility , that veteran could get health care from the community health center , or the private sector . as a result of that legislation , we went further in than any time in recent history in improving health care for the men and women of this country who put their lives on the line to defend them . 
clinton well , i think that president obama has been a great moral leader on these issues , and has laid out an agenda that has been obstructed by the republicans at every turn , so . . . . . . so , what we need to be doing is not only reforming criminal justice i have talked about that at some length , including things like body cameras , but we also need to be following the recommendations of the commissioner that president obama empanelled on policing . there is an agenda there that we need to be following up on . similarly , we need to tackle mass incarceration , and this may be the only bi partisan issue in the congress this year . we actually have people on both sides of the aisle who have reached the same conclusion , that we can not keep imprisoning more people than anybody else in the world . but , i believe that the debate , and the discussion has to go further , anderson , because we've got to do more about the lives of these children . that's why i started off by saying we need to be committed to making it possible for every child to live up to his or her god given potential . that is . . . 
sanders look , i understand that not everybody in florida or in the united states will agree with me , but i think we have got to end the embargo . i believe that we should move towards full and normalized political relations with cuba . i think at the end of the day , it will be a good thing for the cuban people . it will enable them , i think when they see people coming into their country from the united states , move in a more democratic direction , which is what i want to see . so right i'm sorry . 
sanders anderson , thank you very much . i think most americans understand that our country today faces a series of unprecedented crises . the middle class of this country for the last 40 years has been disappearing . millions of americans are working longer hours for lower wages , and yet almost all of the new income and wealth being created is going to the top one percent . as a result of this disastrous citizens united supreme court decision , our campaign finance system is corrupt and is undermining american democracy . millionaires and billionaires are pouring unbelievable sums of money into the political process in order to fund super pacs and to elect candidates who represent their interests , not the interests of working people . today , the scientific community is virtually unanimous climate change is real , it is caused by human activity , and we have a moral responsibility to transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energy and leave this planet a habitable planet for our children and our grandchildren . today in america , we have more people in jail than any other country on earth . african american youth unemployment is 51 percent . hispanic youth unemployment is 36 percent . it seems to me that instead of building more jails and providing more incarceration , maybe just maybe we should be putting money into education and jobs for our kids . what this campaign is about is whether we can mobilize our people to take back our government from a handful of billionaires and create the vibrant democracy we know we can and should have . thank you . 
clinton you know , i have to say , i was very pleased when governor o'malley endorsed me for president in 2008 , and i enjoyed his strong support in that campaign . and i consider him , obviously , a friend . let me say because there's a lot of loose talk going on here we are already flying in syria just as we are flying in iraq . the president has made a very tough decision . what i believe and why i have advocated that the no fly zone which of course would be in a coalition be put on the table is because i'm trying to figure out what leverage we have to get russia to the table . you know , diplomacy is not about getting to the perfect solution . it's about how you balance the risks . 
clinton well , there's no doubt , we have an enormous backlog of infrastructure repairs . here's what i'd do the congress finally got around to pass the highway transportation bill , which should never have been partisan it turned into be one partisan argument . i want to go further . i want to put 250 billion dollars additional , on top of what congress has done . that gets us to a half a billion . i want to start a national infrastructure bank . i want to capitalize it with 25 billion that i believe will leverage 10 times that , that's another 250 billion . so i'm trying to do this in a way that will gain support and be affordable but there's no doubt , we have to do more on our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our ports , our airports . and as we've talked in the beginning here , under our ground , our water systems , our sewer systems . we have pipelines that are leaking and that are dangerous . we have so much work to be done and if we can put millions of peoples to work , i think my plan is a very good way to begin doing that work and get people out there doing it . 
clinton well , i think it's perfectly fair to say that we invested quite a bit in development aid . some of the bravest people that i had the privilege of working with as secretary of state were our development professionals who went sometimes alone , sometimes with our military , into very dangerous places in iraq , in afghanistan , elsewhere . so , there does need to be a whole of government approach , but just because we're involved and we have a strategy doesn't mean we're going to be able to dictate the outcome . these are often very long term kinds of investments that have to be made . crosstalk 
sanders yes , good things happened , but some dangerous mistakes were made that laid the groundwork for some of the problems we're having with a disappearing middle class today . 
sanders the reason the reason why in virtually every contest we are winning by very strong margins younger people and i'm not just talking about very young . you know , the older you get , the younger young gets 45 or younger is i think people are sensing that establishment politics and dependence on wall street and big money interest is really never going to address the crises that we face . and people understand , you can't take money from powerful special interests into your pac and then really expect the american people to believe you're going to stand up to these powerful special interests . so i am very proud of the fact that we have brought millions of new people into the political process . . . 
sanders well , you have guestworker programs that have been described by the southern poverty law center , one of the important institutions in this country who studies these issues , as guestworkers programs akin to slavery , where people came in . they were cheated . they were abused . they were humiliated . and if they stood up for their rights , they would be thrown out of the country . of course , that type of inaudible leads to a race to the bottom for all of our people . and i worked very hard on that issue . and of course , i supported the 2013 immigration reform bill . and what i believe right now is not only that we need comprehensive immigration reform , if the congress does not do its job , as president of the united states i will use the executive powers of that office to do what has to be done , to do what president obama did , and expand on that . 
clinton here's what i can promise jorge , i can promise that i will do everything possible to provide due process . 
clinton i am . . . 
sanders because it was a racist term , and everybody knew it was a racist term . look , much of what secretary clinton said was right . we had a crime bill . i voted for it . it had the violence against women act in it . when as mayor of burlington , we worked very hard to try to eliminate domestic violence . this took us a good step forward . we're talking about the weapon that killed the children in sandy hook . this banned assault weapons , not insignificant . but where we are today is we have a broken criminal justice system . we have more people in jail than any other country on earth . and in my view , what we have got to do is rethink the system from the bottom on up . and that means , for a start and we don't talk about this . the media doesn't talk about it you got 51 percent of african american kids today who graduated high school who are unemployed or underemployed . you know what i think ? maybe we invest in jobs and education for those kids , not jails and incarceration . and i'll tell you what else . and i'll tell you what else i think . and that is , we have got and this is the difference between the secretary and myself as i understand it . we have got to have the guts to rethink the so called war on drugs . too many lives . . . 
sanders judy , one area very briefly . . . 
sanders i don't think i am pandering . but you have not been in the united states congress . 
clinton well , we did have a plan , and i think it's fair to say that of all of the arab leaders , gaddafi probably had more blood on his hands of americans than anybody else . and when he moved on his own people , threatening a massacre , genocide , the europeans and the arabs , our allies and partners , did ask for american help and we provided it . and we didn't put a single boot on the ground , and gaddafi was deposed . the libyans turned out for one of the most successful , fairest elections that any arab country has had . they elected moderate leaders . now , there has been a lot of turmoil and trouble as they have tried to deal with these radical elements which you find in this arc of instability , from north africa to afghanistan . and it is imperative that we do more not only to help our friends and partners protect themselves and protect our own homeland , but also to work to try to deal with this arc of instability , which does have a lot of impact on what happens in a country like libya . 
o'malley and martha . . . 
clinton you know , let's set the same standard for everybody . when everybody does it , ok , i will do it , but let's set and expect the same standard on tax returns . everybody does it , and then we move forward . 
o'malley juan carlos ? 
clinton look , i have the greatest respect for senator sanders and for his supports and i'm going to keep working as hard as i can to reach as many people of all ages about what i will do , what the experience and the ideas that i have that i will bring to the white house and i hope to have their support when i'm the democratic nominee . 
o'malley . . . and start taking advice . . . 
clinton so , yes , we both want to make sure . . . 
sanders . . . you know . . . 
clinton well , john , i think that we have to look at isis as the leading threat of an international terror network . it cannot be contained , it must be defeated . there is no question in my mind that if we summon our resources , both our leadership resources and all of the tools at our disposal , not just military force , which should be used as a last resort , but our diplomacy , our development aid , law enforcement , sharing of intelligence in a much more open and cooperative way that we can bring people together . but it cannot be an american fight . and i think what the president has consistently said which i agree with is that we will support those who take the fight to isis . that is why we have troops in iraq that are helping to train and build back up the iraqi military , why we have special operators in syria working with the kurds and arabs , so that we can be supportive . but this cannot be an american fight , although american leadership is essential . 
clinton if their states agree , then we want more states to do the same thing . 
clinton well , i think this is one of the most important issues facing our country right now . and i fully support president obama's intention under the constitution to nominate a successor to justice scalia . and i believe . . . . . . i believe no state probably understands this better than florida . because let's remember three words bush versus gore . a court took away a presidency . now we've got the republican congress trying to take away the constitution . and we should not tolerate that . and so from my perspective , it is imperative that we put enormous pressure on the republicans in the senate to do their constitutional duty . now , obviously you look for people who are not only qualified on paper , but have a heart , have life experience , understand what these decisions mean in the lives of americans . and understand the balance of power that their decisions can disrupt one way or the other . so clearly , i would look for people who believe that roe v . wade is settled law and that citizens united needs to be overturned as quickly as possible . 
clinton well , that that's exactly what i've been doing . when we met in copenhagen in 2009 and , literally , president obama and i were hunting for the chinese , going throughout this huge convention center , because we knew we had to get them to agree to something . because there will be no effective efforts against climate change unless china and india join with the rest of the world . they told us they'd left for the airport ; we found out they were having a secret meeting . we marched up , we broke in , we said , we've been looking all over for you . let's sit down and talk about what we need to do . and we did come up with the first international agreement that china has signed . thanks to president obama's leadership , it's now gone much further . 
sanders well , you know , i think , from a historical point of view , somebody with my background , somebody with my views , somebody who has spent his entire life taking on the big money interests , i think a sanders victory would be of some historical accomplishment , as well . 
clinton well , that that is not that is not what happened , and i think it's important for people to understand . because of the proliferation of guns , because of the epidemic of gun violence in our country , there were a group of cities , states , and other concerned people who , in the late 90s and in the early 2000s , were working on legal theories that they thought would force gun makers to do more to make guns safer and force sellers to be much more responsible . the nra saw this happening , and they said , we've got to stop it . last thing in the world we want is to have guns that you can only shoot with your fingerprint , or to have guns with such strong safety locks on them that they may not be sellable . so the nra went to the congress , and the head of the nra has said this was the most important nra legislation in more than 20 years . . . 
sanders . . . what we should do , and one of the things we should do is not only talk the talk , but walk the walk . i am very proud to be the only candidate up here who does not have a super pac , who's not raising huge sums of money from wall street . . . . . . and special interests . i am enormously proud . never believed it would happen that we have raised 3 . 5 million individual contributions , averaging 27 dollars a piece . that is what the political revolution means . 
clinton well , i have been several times in your services and have joined in those prayers and have also been privileged to lead them in some settings . i pray very specifically for people whom i know by name . people who either have gone through or are experiencing difficult times , illness , divorce , death , disappointment , all of the life experiences that confront most of us . i pray for the will of god to be known that we can know it and to the best of our limited ability , try to follow it and fulfill it . i have said many times that , you know , i am a praying person , and if i haven't been during the time i was in the white house , i would have become one . because it's very hard to imagine living under that kind of pressure without being able to fall back on prayer and on my faith . so i do pray for people in authority . i try to think about what they are going through , even when i disagree with them . trying to find some common ground , some common understanding that perhaps can make me more empathetic . i don't always succeed . i will tell you that . so i pray on a pretty regular basis during the day , because i need that strength and i need that support . and especially when you are in the position that i'm in and that senator sanders is in , where you are asking people to vote for you , to give you the most important job , not only in our country , but i would argue in the world . i think humility is one of the most important attributes that you bring to both that seeking and then if you're fortunate enough , to that holding of office and that's what i will try to do . 
chafee and it all started with the iraq invasion . 
clinton well , there are so many , i don't know where to start . laughter i guess the one i i would pick is the fact that i was part of a very small group that had to advise the president about whether or not to go after bin laden . i spent a lot of time in the situation room as secretary of state and there were many very difficult choices presented to us . but probably that was the most challenging because there was no certainty attached to it . the intelligence was by no means absolute . we had all kinds of questions that we discussed and , you know , at the end , i recommended to the president that we take the chance to do what we could to find out whether that was bin laden and to finally bring him to justice . it was an excruciating experience . i couldn't talk to anybody about it . in fact , after it happened , the president called my husband he called all the former presidents and he said to bill , well i assume hillary has told you about this . and bill said , no , no , she hasn't . there was nobody to talk to and it really did give me an insight into the very difficult problems presidents face . 
clinton jorge , that makes my point . at the time i e mailed with my daughter , a terrorist group had taken credit for the attacks on our facility in benghazi . within 16 , 18 hours , they rescinded taking credit . they did it all on social media . and the video did play a role . we have captured one of the lead terrorists and he admits it was both a terrorist attack and it was influenced by the video . this was fog of war . this was complicated . the most effective , comprehensive reports and studies demonstrate that . look , as i said in the beginning , i deeply regret that we lost four americans . 
clinton well , first , the most important job of being president is obviously to keep our country safe and to keep the families of america safe . i have a plan that i've put forward to go after isis . not to contain them , but to defeat them . and it has three parts . first , to go after them and deprive them of the territory they occupy now in both syria and iraq . secondly , to go after and dismantle their global network of terrorism . and thirdly , to do more to keep us safe . under each of those three parts of my plan , i have very specific recommendations about what to do . obviously , in the first , we do have to have a an american led air campaign , we have to have arab and kurdish troops on the ground . secondly , we've got to go after everything from north africa to south asia and beyond . and then , most importantly , here at home , i think there are three things that we have to get right . we have to do the best possible job of sharing intelligence and information . that now includes the internet , because we have seen that isis is a very effective recruiter , propagandist and inciter and celebrator of violence . that means we have to work more closely with our great tech companies . they can't see the government as an adversary , we can't see them as obstructionists . we've got to figure out how we can do more to understand who is saying what and what they're planning . and we must work more closely with muslim american communities . just like martin , i met with a group of muslim americans this past week to hear from them about what they're doing to try to stop radicalization . they will be our early warning signal . that's why we need to work with them , not demonize them , as the republicans have been doing . 
sanders off mike 
o'malley great question . 
sanders to suddenly . . . 
sanders that's my bill . check it out . 
clinton well , let me respond , as i have numerous times during this campaign . you know , i have a public record and you can go look it up . i went to wall street before the great recession and basically called them out , said that their behavior was putting our economy at risk , called for a moratorium on foreclosures . i went to the orlando area during the '08 campaign to make the same case , visiting with families who had been defrauded by mortgages , these subprime mortgages that put them and their homes at risk . 
sanders you're looking at a senator and former congressman who proudly has a 100 percent pro choice voting record , who will take on those republican governors who are trying to restrict a woman's right to choose , who will take on those governors right now who are discriminating outrageously against the lgbt community , who comes from a state which led the effort for gay marriage in this country , proudly so . 
sanders i think we already are . younger generation understands it instinctively . i was home in burlington , vermont , on christmas eve , the temperature was 65 degrees . people in vermont know what's going on . people who did ice fishing , where their ice is no longer there on the lake understand what's going on . i'm on both the environmental and energy committees . the debate is over . climate change is real . it is already causing major problems . and if we do not act boldly and decisively , a bad situation will become worse . it is amazing to me , and i think we'll have agreement on this up here , that we have a major party , called the republican party that is so owned by the fossil fuel industry and their campaign contributions that they don't even have the courage , the decency to listen to the scientists . it is beyond my comprehension how we can elect a president of the united states , somebody like trump , who believes that climate change is a hoax invented by the chinese . laughter bottom line is , we need to be bold and decisive , we can create millions of jobs . we must , for the sake of our kids and grandchildren , transform our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energy . i've got the most comprehensive legislation in the senate to do that . and as president , i will fight to make that happen . 
sanders secretary clinton , i do have a disagreement here . if my memory is correct , i think when we saw children coming from these horrendous , horrendously violent areas of honduras and neighboring countries , people who are fleeing drug violence and cartel violence , i thought it was a good idea to allow those children to stay in this country . that was not , as i understand it , the secretary's position . in terms of 2007 immigration reform , yeah , i did vote against it . i voted against it because the southern poverty law center , among other groups , said that the guest worker programs that were embedded in this agreement were akin to slavery . akin to slavery , where people came into this country to do guest work were abused , were exploited , and if they stood up for their rights , they'd be thrown out of this country . so it wasn't just me who opposed it . it was lulac , one of the large latino organizations in this country . it was the afl cio . it was some of the most progressive members of the united states congress who opposed it for that reason . but we are where we are right now . and where we are right now is we have got to stand up to the trumps of the world who are trying to divide us up . what we have to do right now is bring our people together and understand that we must provide a path towards citizenship for 11 million undocumented people . 
sanders may i respond to the critique on the . . . 
clinton and there has got to be a way to have more warning signals and more efforts to try to stop that from happening like with the man who shot your daughter . 
clinton i want to follow up because i think underneath juan carlos' important questions , there is such a difference between everything you're hearing here on this stage , and what we hear from the republicans . 
o'malley yeah . anna , i have put forward a plan and i'm the only candidate , i believe , in either party to do this to move america forward to a 100 percent clean electric grid by 2050 . we did not land a man on the moon with an all of the above strategy . it was an intentional engineering challenge , and we solved it as a nation . and our nation must solve this one . so i put forward the plan that would extend the investor tax credits for solar and for wind . if you go across iowa , you see that 30 percent of their energy now comes from wind . we're here in las vegas , one of the most sustainable cities in america , doing important things in terms of green building , architecture and design . we can get there as a nation , but it's going to require presidential leadership . and as president , i intend to sign as my very first order in office the an order that moves us as a nation and dedicates our resources to solving this problem and moving us to a 100 percent clean electric grid by 2050 . 
webb thank you . crosstalk 
sanders what is going is a disgrace beyond belief . as the president of the united states , this is what i would do is if local government does not have the resources if state government for whatever reason america shouldn't be poisoned , federal government comes in , federal government acts . what is absolute incredible to me is that water rates have soared in flint . you are paying three times more for poison water than i am paying in burlington , vermont for clean water . first thing is you say , people are not paying a water bill for poison and that is retroactive . second of all , to ease anxiety , cdc has to come in and examine every child and adult in this community in terms of the amount of lead they may have . thirdly , the wealthiest country has to rebuild the crumbling infrastructure , our water systems . i have a bill for a trillion dollars , it creates 13 million jobs rebuilding flint , michigan and communities all over the country . 
o'malley i believe that , as president , i would not be so quick to pull for a military tool . i believe that a no fly zone in syria , at this time , actually , secretary , would be a mistake . you have to enforce no fly zones , and i believe , especially with the russian air force in the air , it could lead to an escalation because of an accident that we would deeply regret . i support president obama . i think we have to play a long game , and i think , ultimately you want to talk about blunders ? i think assad's invasion of syria will be seen as a blunder . 
clinton i think that is the number one requirement . i also said that we should take increased numbers of refugees . the administration originally said 10 . i said we should go to 65 , but only if we have as careful a screening and vetting process as we can imagine , whatever resources it takes because i do not want us to , in any way , inadvertently allow people who wish us harm to come into our country . but i want to say a quick word about what senator sanders and then governor o'malley said . we do have to take a hard look at the defense budget and we do have to figure out how we get ready to fight the adversaries of the future , not the past . but we have to also be very clear that we do have some continuing challenges . we've got challenges in the south china sea because of what china is doing in building up these military installations . we have problems with russia . just the other day , russia allowed a television camera to see the plans for a drone submarine that could carry a tactical nuclear weapon . so we've got to look at the full range and then come to some smart decisions about having more streamlined and focused approach . 
sanders well , i absolutely support that . at the heart of my immigration policy and i should say that the new york times editorial board called my immigration policy the most progressive and the strongest of any candidate running . but to answer your question , the essence of what we are trying to do is to unite families , not to divide families . the idea that a mother is living here and her children are on the other side of the border is wrong and immoral . a number of months ago , i talked to a young man who was serving in the united states military and while he was serving in the military , his wife was deported . that is beyond comprehension and policies that should not be allowed to exist . so , ma'am , i will do everything that i can to unite your family . your children deserve to be with their mother . 
clinton i haven't talked to secretary carter , but here's what i would think he's planning . we do have the nuclear weapons agreement with iran , that's an enforcement consequence , action for action , follow on . we have a plan , we will watch them , we will be vigilant . we do have to worry about north korea . they continue to develop their nuclear weapons capability , and they're working very hard on their ballistic missile capability . and , i know that some of those plans could very well lead to a missile that might reach hawaii , if not the west coast . we do have to try to get the countries in the region to work with us to do everything we can to confine , and constrain them . but , what secretary carter is looking at is the constant pressure that russia's putting on our european allies . the way that russia is trying to move the boundaries of the post world war ii europe . the way that he is trying to set european countries against one another , seizing territory , holding it in crimea . beginning to explore whether they could make some inroads in the baltics . we know that they are deeply engaged in supporting assad because they want to have a place in the middle east . they have a naval base , they have an air base in syria . they want to hang on to that . i think what secretary carter is seeing , and i'm glad he is , is that we got to get nato back working for the common defense . we've got to do more to support our partners in nato , and we have to send a very clear message to putin that this kind of belligerence , that this kind of testing of boundaries will have to be responded to . the best way to do that is to put more armor in , put more money from the europeans in so they're actually contributing more to their own defense . 
clinton look , i am deeply concerned about what's happening in every community in america , and that includes white communities , where we are seeing an increase in alcoholism , addiction , earlier deaths . people with a high school education or less are not even living as long as their parents lived . this is a remarkable and horrifying fact . and that's why i've come forward with , for example , a plan to revitalize coal country , the coalfield communities that have been so hard hit by the changing economy , by the reduction in the use of coal . you know , coal miners and their families who helped turn on the lights and power our factories for generations are now wondering , has our country forgotten us ? do people not care about all of our sacrifice ? and i'm going to do everything i can to address distressed communities , whether they are communities of color , whether they are white communities , whether they are in any part of our country . i particularly appreciate the proposal that congressman jim clyburn has the 10 20 30 proposal to try to spend more federal dollars in communities with persistent generational poverty . and you know what ? if you look at the numbers , there are actually as many , if not more white communities that are truly being left behind and left out . so , yes , i do think it would be a terrible oversight not to try to address the very real problems that white americans particularly those without a lot of education whose jobs have you know , no longer provided them or even no longer present in their communities , because we have to focus where the real hurt is . and that's why , as president , i will look at communities that need special help and try to deliver that . 
sanders john john , this country today has more income and wealth inequality than any major country on earth . we have a corrupt campaign finance system dominated by super pacs . we are the only major country on earth that doesn't guarantee healthcare to all people . we have the highest rate of childhood poverty , and we're the only country in the world virtually the only country that doesn't guarantee paid family and medical leave . that's not the america that i think we should be . but in order to bring about the changes that we need , we need a political revolution . millions of people are going to have to stand up , turn off the tv , get involved in the political process and tell the big money interest that we are taking back our country . please go to berniesanders . com . please become part of the political revolution . thank you . commercial break 
clinton yeah . you know , i i respect the passion an intensity . i represented wall street , as a senator from new york , and i went to wall street in december of 2007 before the big crash that we had and i basically said , cut it out ! quit foreclosing on homes ! quit engaging in these kinds of speculative behaviors . i took on the bush administration for the same thing . so i have thought deeply and long about what we're gonna do to do exactly what i think both the senator and the governor want , which is to rein in and stop this risk . and my plan would have the potential of actually sending the executives to jail . nobody went to jail after 100 billion in fines were paid . . . 
clinton thank you . i am very grateful for the fact that the people of new york gave me the great honor of serving as your senator . you took a chance on me in 2000 , and then you re elected me with one of the biggest margins we've had in our state in 2006 . during those years , we worked closely together . i tried to have your back , and time and time again , you had mine . we took on the challenges of 9 11 together . we got the money to rebuild new york . we came to the aid of our brave first responders , construction workers , and others who endangered their own health by helping to save lives and search for survivors . we worked to create jobs despite the disastrous policies of george w . bush across new york . and we stood up time and time again against all kinds of vested powerful interests . i'm asking for your support again in the primary on tuesday to continue that work together , to take what we did in new york and to take those new york values to the white house , and put them to work on behalf of all of our people , to knock down the barriers that stand in the way . you know , of course we have economic barriers . i've been fighting against those trying to even the odds most of my adult life . but we also have racial barriers , gender barriers , homophobic barriers , disability barriers . we have a lot of barriers that stand in the way of people being treated as they should and having the chance to live up to their own god given potential . so i am humbly asking for your support on tuesday . i'll work my heart out for you again . and together , we won't just make promises we can't keep . we'll deliver results that will improve the lives of the people in new york and in america . that's what we'll do together . thank you , new york . 
sanders and when you want to , check it out . and if you think if you think that we can simply go forward and pass something tomorrow without bringing people together , you are sorely mistaken . 
clinton yes look , i have made it clear based on senator sanders' own record that he has voted with the nra , with the gun lobby numerous times . he voted against the brady bill five times . he voted for what we call , the charleston loophole . he voted for immunity from gunmakers and sellers which the nra said , was the most important piece of gun legislation in 20 years . he voted to let guns go onto the amtrak , guns go into national parks . he voted against doing research to figure out how we can save lives . let's not forget what this is about , 90 people a day die from gun violence in our country . that's 33 , 000 people a year . one of the most horrific examples not a block from here where we had nine people murdered . now , i am pleased to hear that senator sanders has reversed his position on immunity and i look forward to him joining with those members of congress who have already introduced legislation . there is no other industry in america that was given the total pass that the gun makers and dealers were and that needs to be reversed . 
sanders no . that's just media stuff . i was sick and tired of hillary clinton's e mail . i am still sick and tired of hillary clinton's e mails . laughter and the issue is , the problem is , the front pages every day were dealing with it . i didn't know i had so much power . but after i said that , we're not hearing so much about hillary clinton's e mails . what i would like for the media now is for us to be talking about why the middle class is disappearing , why we have more people in jail than any other country , why we have massive levels of income and wealth inequality , and we're the only major country on earth without paid family and medical leave . we've gotten off the hillary's e mails , good . let's go to the major issues facing america . 
clinton well , look , i supported the crime bill . my husband has apologized . he was the president who actually signed it , senator sanders . . . 
clinton the nra came to their supporters in the congress and said , stop it , stop it now , and senator sanders joined those who did . 
sanders the issue is i believe , and i believe this honestly , and i don't know that there's much difference on guns between us . but i believe coming from a state that has virtually no gun control , i believe that i am in position to reach out to the 60 or 70 percent of the american people who agree with us on those issues . the problem is . . . 
sanders no , well , he has given us a good , good basis and foundation . we have got to do better than that . and of course we should . but here's what i would do . i would end i would make sure that the department of justice investigated every killing of a citizen of this country when they are under apprehension from a police officer or when they are killed in police custody . i would end the militarization of local police departments . i would develop model programs to make police departments look like the communities that they serve . i would end minimal sentencing and give judges more discretion . i would recognize that substance abuse and drug addiction is a health issue , not a criminal issue . and i would make sure that those people who left jail had the education and job training so they don't go back into the same environment which got them in jail in the first place . 
sanders there is a process under way , and that process will take its course . today in america , the middle class is disappearing . we have massive levels of income and wealth inequality , climate change threatens the whole planet , 47 million people live in poverty . i'm going to focus on the issues facing the working families of this country . that process specifically . 
sanders well , let me tell you , donald trump and his billionaire friends under my policies are going to pay a hell of a lot more in taxes today taxes in the future than they're paying today . but in terms of education , this is what i think . this is the year 2015 . a college degree today , dana , is the equivalent of what a high school degree was 50 years ago . and what we said 50 years ago and a hundred years ago is that every kid in this country should be able to get a high school education regardless of the income of their family . i think we have to say that is true for everybody going to college . i think we don't need a complicated system , which the secretary is talking about , the income goes down , the income goes down , if you're poor you have to work , and so forth and so on . i pay for my program , by the way , through a tax on wall street speculation , which will not only make public colleges and universities tuition free , it will substantially lower interest rates on college debt , a major crisis in this country . 
sanders yes , exactly , exactly . 
clinton 
o'malley senator , i'm the only person on this stage that's actually balanced a budget every year for 15 years . 
o'malley can i share this quick story ? 
sanders the big banks 
sanders well , this is what i would say . it is a complicated relationship . i congratulate secretary of state john kerry and the president for working on this agreement . as you've indicated , what is happening in syria , the number of people , the hundreds of thousands of people who have been killed men , women , 20 , 000 children , the people who are forced to flee their own country their own country it is unspeakable . it is a real horror . now , what i think is that right now we have got to do our best in developing positive relations with russia . but let's be clear russia's aggressive actions in the crimea and in ukraine have brought about a situation where president obama and nato correctly , i believe are saying , you know what , we're going to have to beef up our troop level in that part of the world to tell putin that his aggressiveness is not going to go unmatched , that he is not going to get away with aggressive action . i happen to believe that putin is doing what he is doing because his economy is increasingly in shambles and he's trying to rally his people in support of him . but bottom line is the president is right . we have to put more money . we have to work with nato to protect eastern europe against any kind of russian aggression . 
clinton well , senator sanders voted for it as well . are you going to ask him the same question ? 
o'malley david , i am the very first . . . 
sanders who not only thinks we are not going to not defund planned parenthood , we've got to expand funding for planned parenthood . 
clinton well , you know , everybody on this stage has changed a position or two . we've been around a cumulative quite some period of time . laughter you know , we know that if you are learning , you're gonna change your position . i never took a position on keystone until i took a position on keystone . but i have been on the forefront of dealing with climate change , starting in 2009 , when president obama and i crashed ph a meeting with the chinese and got them to sign up to the first international agreement to combat climate change that they'd ever joined . so i'm . . . 
sanders what we need to do is to do everything that we can to make certain that guns do not fall into the hands of people who do not have them . now , i voted against this gun liability law because i was concerned that in rural areas all over this country , if a gun shop owner sells a weapon legally to somebody , and that person then goes out and kills somebody , i don't believe it is appropriate that that gun shop owner who just sold a legal weapon to be held accountable and be sued . but , what i do believe is when gun shop owners and others knowingly are selling weapons to people who should not have them somebody walks in . they want thousands of rounds of ammunition , or they want a whole lot of guns , yes , that gun shop owner or that gun manufacturer should be held liable . 
sanders isn't it tragic that the large multinational corporations making billions of dollars a year , shutting down in america , going to china , going to mexico ? absolutely they need a handout from the american middle class i don't think so . second of all . second of all , secretary clinton traveled the world , she has been to europe . and let's talk about europe versus the united states . i'm sure that when you were in europe , and france , and germany and the u . k . , and all of the other countries ; you noticed something and that is every one of those countries guarantees health care to all of their people as a right . and i am sure you know as you know you do that in countries like the u . k . compared to america , we are spending almost three times as much as they spend in the u . k . for health care for our people . we are spending 50 percent more than the french . when we talk about europe and their pluses and minuses , one thing they have done well that we should emulate and that is guaranteed health care for all people for a better care for all . 
clinton well , i'm a little bewildered about how to respond when you have an agreement which gives you the framework to actually take the action that would have only come about because under the obama administration in the face of implacable hostility from the republicans in congress , president obama moved forward on gas mileage , he moved forward on the clean power plant . he has moved forward on so many of the fronts that he could given the executive actions that he was able to take . and , you know , i am getting a little bit i'm getting a little bit concerned here because , you know , i really believe that the president has done an incredible job against great odds and deserves to be supported . cheering and applause now , it's easy it's easy to diagnose the problem . it's harder to do something about the problem . and . . . 
sanders the question that the american people have to determine you know , can you say that wall street is greedy , they're fraudulent , but they're not dumb . why are they making those kind of large contributions ? 
clinton well , senator , look , i think we're in vigorous agreement here . we both want to get more revenue in . i have yet to see a proposal that you're describing that the raising the cap would apply to passive income . that has not been . . . 
sanders well . . . 
o'malley excuse me , no . 
clinton i have said , look , there are certain there are certain expectations when you run for president . this is a new one . and i've said , if everybody agrees to do it because there are speeches for money on the other side . i know that . but i will tell you this , there is there is a long standing expectation that everybody running release their tax returns , and you can go you can go to my website and see eight years of tax returns . and i've released 30 years of tax returns . and i think every candidate , including senator sanders and donald trump , should do the same . 
sanders it means that we have to rethink the so called war on drugs which has destroyed the lives of millions of people , which is why i have taken marijuana out of the controlled substance act . so that it will not be a federal crime . 
sanders and i respectfully disagree . 
sanders no . i think the vacuum was created by the disastrous war in iraq , which i vigorously opposed . not only did i vote against it , i helped lead the opposition . and what happened there is yes , it's easy to get rid of a two bit dictator like saddam hussein , but there wasn't the kind of thought as to what happens the day after you get him and what kind of political vacuum occurs . and who rises up ? groups like isis . so i think that president obama made a promise to the american people when he ran , and he said you know what , i'm going to do my best to bring american troops home . and i supported what he did . our job is to train and provide military support for muslim countries in the area who are prepared to take on isis . and one point i want to make here that is not made very often , you have incredibly wealthy countries in that region , countries like saudi arabia , countries like qatar . qatar happens to be the largest wealthiest country per capita in the world . they have got to start putting in some skin in the game and not just ask the united states to do it . 
sanders i think we're going to win this nomination to tell you the truth . cheering look , let me acknowledge what is absolutely true . secretary clinton cleaned our clock in the deep south . no question about it . we got murdered there . that is the most conservative part of this great country . that's the fact . but you know what ? we're out of the deep south now . and we're moving up . we got here . we're going to california . we got a number of large states there . and having won seven out of the last eight caucuses and primaries , having a level of excitement and energy among working people and low income people doing better against donald trump and the other republicans in poll after poll than secretary clinton is , yeah , i believe that we're going to win this nomination , and i believe we're going to obliterate donald trump or whoever the republican candidate is . 
clinton no . i mean , of course that's a theoretical question , and we don't know what it would be for , and we don't know how many numbers there are . i am against american combat troops being in syria and iraq . i support special forces . i support trainers . i support the air campaign . and i think we're making some progress . i want to continue to intensify that , and that's exactly what the president is doing . 
o'malley and may i point out that under ronald reagan's first term , the highest marginal rate was 70 percent . and in talking to a lot of our neighbors who are in that super wealthy , millionaire and billionaire category , a great numbers of them love their country enough to do more again in order to create more opportunity for america's middle class . 
clinton let's do that again in america . 
clinton no . revolution never came . i waited and i got the scars to show for it . we now have this great accomplishment known as the affordable care act , and i don't think we should have to be defending it among democrats . we ought to be working to improve it and prevent republicans from both underming it and even repealing it . i have looked at i have looked at the legislation that senator sanders has proposed , and basically , he does eliminate the affordable care act , eliminates private insurance , eliminates medicare , eliminates medicaid , tricare , children's health insurance program puts it all together in a big program which he then hands over to the states to administer . and i have to tell you , i would not want if i lived in iowa , terry branstad administering my health care . i i think i think as democrats we ought to proudly support the affordable care act , improve it , and make it the model that we know it can be . 
clinton no . 
chafee absolutely . we have to repair american credibility after we told the world that saddam hussein had weapons of mass destruction , which he didn't . so there's an issue of american credibility out there . so any time someone is running to be our leader , and a world leader , which the american president is , credibility is an issue out there with the world . and we have repair work to be done . i think we need someone that has the best in ethical standards as our next president . that's how i feel . 
clinton that is like the nra position . no . 
sanders well , the only problem is , wolf , she didn't answer your question . you asked her whether she thought that vermont was responsible . you asked her whether she thought that vermont was responsible for a lot of the gun violence . you made the point what she said was totally absurd . 
sanders there were parts of that bill which agree with parts i disagree . i am certainly , absolutely , willing to look at that bill again and make sure there's a stronger bill . 
clinton oh , for goodness that's not going to happen . i'm not even answering that question . 
o'malley thank you . 
sanders i was asked a question . you know , one of the things , andrea , and i that question annoys me . i cannot walk down the street secretary clinton knows this without being told how much i have to attack secretary clinton , want to get me on the front pages of the paper , i'd make some vicious attack . i have avoided doing that . trying to run an issue oriented campaign . 
sanders i apologize for not hearing all of that question . 
sanders well , rachel , actually , that wasn't accurate . in 1988 the republican did win , i believe , by 3 points . i came in second . it was 34 31 , i think , 19 for the democrat . in that race the democrat was the spoiler , not me . and it is true . . . laughter and applause . . . it is true , it's not to be denied , i am the longest serving independent in the history of the united states congress . people of vermont sent me to washington as an independent . that is true . but on the other hand , i havewhen i was in the house for 16 years , i caucused with the democrats . in the senate for nine years caucused with the democrats , of course . and i was elected by the democrats to be chair of the veterans committee three years ago , which i'm very proud of . and now am the rankings member on the budget committee , leader of the democrats in opposition to the majority republicans . i am running for president as a democrat . and if elected , not only do i hope to bring forth a major change in national priorities , but let me be frank , i do want to see major changes in the democratic party . i want to see working people and young people come into the party in a way that doesn't exist now . and you know what , i want a 50 state strategy so the democratic party is not just the party of 25 states . 
clinton that will help latinos as well as every other working person in our country . 
clinton well , let me start by saying that senator sanders and i share some very big progressive goals . i've been fighting for universal healthcare for many years , and we're now on the path to achieving it . i don't want us to start over again . i think that would be a great mistake , to once again plunge our country into a contentious debate about whether we should have and what kind of system we should have for healthcare . i want to build on the progress we've made ; got from 90 percent coverage to 100 percent coverage . and i don't want to rip away the security that people finally have ; 18 million people now have healthcare ; preexisting conditions are no longer a bar . so we have a difference . i also believe in affordable college , but i don't believe in free college , because every expert that i have talked to says , look , how will you ever control the costs . what i want to do is make sure middle class kids , not donald trump's kids , get to be able to afford college . i want to get the economy going again . it's not just enough about what we're against , as important as that is . i have a plan to create new jobs , manufacturing , infrastructure , clean energy jobs that will make us the 21st century clean energy super power . i also want to make sure small businesses can start and grow again . and of course , i believe in raising the minimum wage and equal pay for work . but the numbers just don't add up , from what senator sanders has been proposing . that's why all of the independent experts , all of the editorial boards that have vetted both of us have concluded that it is just not achievable . let's go down a path where we can actually tell people what we will do . a progressive is someone who makes progress . that's what i intend to do . 
webb look , let's start i've been trying to get in this conversation for about 10 minutes let's start with why russia is in syria right now . there are three strategic failings that have allowed this to occur . the first was the invasion of iraq , which destabilized ethnic elements in iraq and empowered iran . the second was the arab spring , which created huge vacuums in libya and in syria that allowed terrorist movements to move in there . and the third was the recent deal allowing iran to move forward and eventually acquire a nuclear weapon , which sent bad signals , bad body language into the region about whether we are acquiescing in iran becoming a stronger piece of the formula in that part of the world . now , i say this as someone who spent five years in the pentagon and who opposed the war in iraq , whose son fought in iraq , i've fought in vietnam . but if you want a place where we need to be in terms of our national strategy , a focus , the greatest strategic threat that we have right now is resolving our relationship with china . and we need to do this because of their aggression in the region . we need to do it because of the way they treat their own people . 
clinton i want to enhance the benefits for the poorest recipients of social security . we have a lot of women on social security , particularly widowed and single women who didn't make a lot of money during their careers , and they are impoverished , and they need more help from the social security system . and i will focus i will focus on helping those people who need it the most . and of course i'm going to defend social security . i'm going to look for ways to try to make sure it's solvent into the future . and we also need to talk about health care at some time , because we agree on the goals , we just disagree on the means . 
clinton i will certainly be willing to answer it . i think i did answer it by saying that of course there have to be precautions taken but even the most independent analyst will say the way that hamas places its weapons , the way that it often has its fighters in civilian garb , it is terrible . i'm not saying it's anything other than terrible . it would be great remember , israel left gaza . they took out all the israelis . they turned the keys over to the palestinian people . and what happened ? hamas took over gaza . so instead of having a thriving economy with the kind of opportunities that the children of the palestinians deserve , we have a terrorist haven that is getting more and more rockets shipped in from iran and elsewhere . 
sanders but maybe some of these vulture capitalists who are going to have to lose a little bit of money in this process . 
clinton . . . that's not accurate . 
sanders it's . . . 
sanders and suddenly . . . 
clinton so we're going to have to do even more here than we would do in most other counties . 
clinton but let i'll get to that . but i think it's important , since i understand senator webb's very strong feelings about this , to explain where we were then and to point out that i think president obama made the right decision at the time . and the libyan people had a free election the first time since 1951 . and you know what , they voted for moderates , they voted with the hope of democracy . because of the arab spring , because of a lot of other things , there was turmoil to be followed . but unless you believe the united states should not send diplomats to any place that is dangerous , which i do not , then when we send them forth , there is always the potential for danger and risk . 
sanders now , if you're asking not just me , but countries all over the world was that a disproportionate attack , the answer is that i believe it was , and let me say something else . cheering and applause and , let me say something else . as somebody who is 100 pro israel , in the long run and this is not going to be easy , god only knows , but in the long run if we are ever going to bring peace to that region which has seen so much hatred and so much war , we are going to have to treat the palestinian people with respect and dignity . cheering and applause so what is not to say to say that right now in gaza , right now in gaza unemployment is s somewhere around 40 . you got a log of that area continues , it hasn't been built , decimated , houses decimated health care decimated , schools decimated . i believe the united states and the rest of the world have got to work together to help the palestinian people . that does not make me anti israel . that paves the way , i think . . . 
sanders . . . in order to make it possible for them to afford their education . and i want colleges to get their costs down . they are outrageously high in what they're charging . 
clinton there was no permission to be asked . it had been done by my predecessors . it was permitted . 
webb thank you . ladies and gentlemen , it's been a pleasure to be with you tonight . you've heard a lot of promises up here ; you've heard a lot of rhetoric . they all seem to happen during campaigns , and then once the election's over , people start from scratch again and try to get things done . one of the things i can promise you , if you look at my record , in and out of government , is that i've always been willing to take on a complicated , something unpopular issues , and work them through , the complex issues , and work them through in order to have the solution . we did it with criminal justice reform . we've had a lot of discussion here about criminal justice reform . we did it in other ways . we need a national political strategy for our economy , for our social policy , for social justice , and , by the way , for how you run and manage the most complex bureaucracy in the world , which is the federal government . i know how to lead . i did it in vietnam , i did it in the pentagon , i did it in the senate , and if you will help me overcome this cavalcade of of financial irregularities and money that is poisoning our political process , i am ready to do that for you in the white house . 
webb i got a great deal of admiration and affection for senator sanders , but i bernie , i don't think the revolution's going to come . and i don't think the congress is going to pay for a lot of this stuff . and if there would be a major difference between my administration and the obama administration , it would be in the use of executive authority . i came up as a committee counsel in the congress , used to put dozens of bills through the house floor every year as a committee counsel on the veterans committee . i have a very strong feeling about how our federal system works and how we need to lead and energize the congressional process instead of allowing these divisions to continue to paralyze what we're doing . so i would lead working with both parties in the congress and working through them in the traditional way that our constitution sets ph . 
clinton well . . . 
sanders and i am very pleased i am very pleased that i think in the last national poll that i saw , we were running 18 points ahead of donald trump . 
sanders i can make that promise . 
clinton you know , wait a minute . . . 
sanders well , as somebody who spent many months of my life when i was a kid in israel , who has family in israel , of course israel has a right not only to defend themselves , but to live in peace and security without fear of terrorist attack . that is not a debate . but but what you just read , yeah , i do believe that . israel was subjected to terrorist attacks , has every right in the world to destroy terrorism . but we had in the gaza area not a very large area some 10 , 000 civilians who were wounded and some 1 , 500 who were killed . 
clinton no . not at all . i think that what we're facing with isis is especially complicated . it was a different situation in afghanistan . we were attacked from afghanistan . al qaida was based in afghanistan . we went after those who had attacked us . what's happening in syria and iraq is that , because of the failures in the region , including the failure of the prior government in baghdad , led by maliki , there has been a resurgence of sunni activities , as exemplified by isis . and we have to support sunni arab and kurdish forces against isis , because i believe it would be not only a strategic mistake for the united states to put ground combat troops in , as opposed to special operators , as opposed to trainers , because that is exactly what isis wants . they've advertised that . they want american troops back in the middle east . they want american soldiers on the ground fighting them , giving them many more targets , and giving them a great recruiting opportunity . so , i think it's absolutely wrong policy for us to be even imagining we're going end up putting tens of thousands of american troops into syria and iraq to fight isis . and we do have to form a coalition . i know how hard that is . i have formed them . i put together a coalition , including arabs , with respect to libya and a coalition to put sanctions onto iran . and you have to really work hard at it . and the final thing i would say , bringing donald trump back into it , if you're going to put together a coalition in the region to take on the threat of isis you don't want to alienate the very countries and people you need to be part of the coalition . and so that is part of the reason why this is so difficult . 
clinton but i will tell you exactly how i pay for everything i've proposed . . . crosstalk 
sanders what . . . 
clinton well , i would certainly build on the successes of the affordable care act and work to fix some of the glitches that you just referenced . number one , we do have more people who have access to health care . we have ended the terrible situation that people with pre existing conditions were faced with where they couldn't find at any affordable price health care . women are not charged more than men any longer for our health insurance . and we keep young people on our policies until they turn 26 . those are all really positive developments . but out of pocket costs have gone up too much and prescription drug costs have gone through the roof . and so what i have proposed , number one , is a 5 , 000 tax credit to help people who have very large out of pocket costs be able to afford those . number two , i want medicare to be able to negotiate for lower drug prices just like they negotiate with other countries' health systems . we end up paying the highest prices in the world . and i want us to be absolutely clear about making sure the insurance companies in the private employer policy arena as well as in the affordable care exchanges are properly regulated so that we are not being gamed . and i think that's an important point to make because i'm going through and analyzing the points you were making , martha . we don't have enough competition and we don't have enough oversight of what the insurance companies are charging everybody right now . crosstalk 
o'malley this is what i would say lester , look see , i've listened to secretary clinton and senator sanders go back and forth on which of them has the most inconsistent record on gun safety legislation and i would have to agree with both of them . they've both been inconsistent when it comes to this issue . i'm the one candidate on this stage that actually brought people together to pass comprehensive gun safety legislation . this is very personal to me being from baltimore . i will never forget one occasion visiting a little boy in johns' hopkins hospital , he was getting a birthday haircut , the age of three when drug dealers turned that barbershop into a shooting gallery and that boy's head was pierced with a bullet . and i remember visiting him , it did not kill him i remember visiting him and his mother in johns hopkins hospital . he was getting a birthday haircut , the age of three when drug dealers turned that barbershop into a shooting gallery , and that boys head was pierced with a bullet . and , i remember visiting him , it did not kill him . i remember visiting him and his mother in johns hopkins hospital . in his diapers with tubes running in and out of his head , same age as my little boy . so , after the slaughter of the kids in connecticut last year , we brought people together . we did pass in our state comprehensive gun safety legislation . it did have a ban on combat assault weapons , universal background checks , and you know what ? we did not interrupt a single person's hunting season . i've never met a self respecting deer hunter that needed an ar 15 to down a deer . and , so . . . . . . we're able to actually do these things . 
sanders well , this is what i say , if i understand it and correct me if i'm wrong . if you go to a gun store and you legally purchase a gun , and then , three days later , if you go out and start killing people , is the point of this lawsuit to hold the gun shop owner or the manufacturer of that gun liable ? if that is the point , i have to tell you i disagree . i disagree because you hold people in terms of this liability thing , where you hold manufacturers' liability is if they understand that they're selling guns into an area that it's getting into the hands of criminals , of course they should be held liable . but if they are selling a product to a person who buys it legally , what you're really talking about is ending gun manufacturing in america . i don't agree with that . 
o'malley . . . and i encourage everybody watching this tonight to please , acknowledge that by going online at martinomalley . com and help me wage this campaign for real american capitalism . 
sanders well , what i believe , if my memory is correct here , we spend about 75 percent of the entire cost of the military aspect of nato . given the fact that france has a very good health care system and free public education , college education for their people , the u . k . has a good national health service and they also provide fairly reasonable higher education , you know what , yeah , i do believe that the countries of europe should pick up more of the burden for their defense . yes , i do . 
clinton well , first of all , i know that the president has appealed the decision to the supreme court . and my reading of the law and the constitution convinces me that the president has the authority that he is attempting to exercise with respect to dreamers and their parents , because i think all of us on this stage agree that we need comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship . border security has always been a part of that debate . and it is a fact that the net immigration from mexico and south has basically zeroed out . so , what we want to do is to say , look , we have 11 million people who have been here , many of them for decades . they have children who are doing so well , i've met and worked with dreamers . i think any parent would be so proud of them . so let's move toward what we should be doing as a nation and follow the values of our immigration history and begin to make it possible for them to come out of the shadows and to have a future that gives them a full chance of citizenship . 
clinton . . . both the governor and the senator have focused only on the big banks . lehman brothers , aig , the shadow banking sector were as big a problem in what caused the great recession , i go after them . and i can tell you that the hedge fund billionaires who are running ads against me right now , and karl rove , who started running an ad against me right now , funded by money from the financial services sector , sure thing , i'm the one they don't want to be up against . 
sanders but they will not be paying , martha , any private insurance . so it's unfair to say in total . . . 
sanders so with that invocation , let me say a few words . laughter secretary clinton , i don't have a super pac . i don't get any money from wall street . you have gotten a whole lot of money over the years from wall street . but most importantly , when you look at what happened in the 1990s , go to berniesanders . com . i'll advertise my web site as well . laughter and what you'll find is that i led helped lead the effort as a member of the house financial committee against alan greenspan , against a guy named bill clinton , maybe you know him , maybe you don't . laughter against the republican leadership , who all thought it would be a great idea to merge investor banks and commercial banks and large insurance companies . what a brilliant idea that would be . go to youtube . find out what i said to greenspan . at the end of the day , if teddy roosevelt were alive today , and the governor makes a good point about trade , anti trade , anti monopoly activities . wall street today has too much political power . it has too much economic power . to get deregulated listen to this , they spent 5 billion in lobbying and campaign contributions over a 10 year period . 
clinton you know , first of all first of all , there isn't an issue . when i was in public service serving as the senator from new york , i did stand up to the banks . i did make it clear that their behavior would not be excused . i'm the only one on this stage who did not vote to deregulate swaps and derivatives , as senator sanders did , which led to a lot of the problems that we had with lehman brothers . now , if you're going to look at the problems that actually caused the great recession , you've got to look at the whole picture . it was a giant insurance company , aig . it was an investment bank , lehman brothers . it was mortgage companies like countrywide . i'm not saying that senator sanders did something untoward when he voted to deregulate swaps and derivatives . . . 
sanders chuck , i believe in trade , but i do not believe in unfettered free trade . i believe in fair trade which works for the middle class and working families of this country and not just large multinational corporations . i was not only in opposition to naftaand this is an area where the secretary and i have disagreements . i was not only in opposition to nafta , i was on the picket line in opposition to nafta because i understoodi don't think this is really rocket science . we heard all of the people tell us how many great jobs would be created . i didn't believe that for a second because i understood what the function of nafta , cafta , pntr with china , and the tpp is , it's to say to american workers , hey , you are now competing against people in vietnam who make 56 cents an hour minimum wage . i don't want american workers to compete against people making 56 cents an hour . i don't want companies shutting down in america , throwing people out on the street , moving to china , and bringing their products back into this country . so , do i believe in trade ? of course , i believe in trade . but the current trade agreements over the last 30 years were written by corporate america , for corporate america , resulted in the loss of millions of decent paying jobs , 60 , 000 factories in america lost since 2001 , millions of decent paying jobs ; and also a downward spiral , a race to the bottom where employers say , hey , you don't want to take a cut in pay ? we're going to china . workers today are working longer hours for lower wages . trade is one of the reasons for that . 
clinton . . . saying , no middle class tax raises . that's off the table . . . 
sanders let me be very clear . . . crosstalk 
sanders now , what i believe is in fact that we have a corrupt campaign finance system . and it's not just wall street , it's the drug companies , inaudible received millions of dollars from the fossil fuel industry . we've got to overturn citizens united and end that . 
clinton this is why i go back to that 2007 vote because if we had been successful then , a lot of the issues we are still discussing today would be in the rear view mirror . i want us to be able to achieve comprehensive immigration reform if i'm so fortunate enough to be president . and we do have to take a look at asylum laws . when i was secretary of state , i worked to try to support many different approaches to ending the violence in central america . i was there meeting with leaders , security leaders , and others . and i think the congress should support the president's request to fund programs that would protect people and change the culture of criminality and violence in central america , helping people be able to stay safely in their homes and countries . 
clinton well , first , let's remember why we became part of a coalition to stop gadhafi from committing massacres against his people . the united states was asked to support the europeans and the arab partners that we had and we did a lot of due diligence about whether we should or not , and eventually , yes , i recommended and the president decided that we would support the action to protect civilians on the ground and that led to the overthrow of gadhafi . i think that what libya then did by having a full free election , which elected moderates , was an indication of their crying need and desire to get on the right path . now , the whole region has been rendered unstable , in part because of the aftermath of the arab spring , in part because of the very effective outreach and propagandizing that isis and other terrorist groups do . but what we're seeing happening in libya right now is that there has been a fragile agreement to put aside the differences that exist among libyans themselves to try to dislodge isis from sirte , the home town of gadhafi , and to begin to try to create a national government . you know , this is not easy work . we did a lot to help . we did as much as we could because the libyans themselves had very strong feelings about what they wished to accept . but we're always looking for ways about what more we can do to try to give people a chance to be successful . 
clinton oh , wait a minute , senator . you know , not only do i have hundreds of thousands of donors , most of them small . and i'm very proud that for the first time a majority of my donors are women , 60 percent . so , i represented new york , and i represented new york on 9 11 when we were attacked . where were we attacked ? we were attacked in downtown manhattan where wall street is . i did spend a whole lot of time and effort helping them rebuild . that was good for new york . it was good for the economy and it was a way to rebuke the terrorists who had attacked our country . so , you know , it's fine for you to say what you're going to say , but i looked very carefully at your proposal . reinstating glass steagall is a part of what very well could help , but it is nowhere near enough . my proposal is tougher , more effective , and more comprehensive because i go after all of wall street not just the big banks . 
sanders now , let me say this . i gather secretary clinton hasn't listened to too many of my speeches . laughter or followed my work in the congress as very few people stood up to george w . bush whether it was the war in iraq or any other of his policies . laughter now , when we talk about the policies of the 1990s , i worked closely and supported president clinton . and obviously , i have worked very closely in supporting president obama , who has taken our economy a very long way from where bush left us . but when you go back to the 1990s , let's remember , that's when wall street deregulation took place . 
clinton . . . well , nobody does . nobody does , senator sanders . 
clinton well , i was speaking about drug cartels and criminal activity that was very concerning to folks across the country . i think it was a poor choice of words , i never used it before , i haven't used it since , i would not use it again . because my whole life , to go back to what i was saying to mr . mcgee , is , you know , really , ever since i went to work for the children's defense fund , is to try to figure out ways to even the odds for people that are left out and left behind . and i know very well that we have too many kids in our country right now who are living in poverty , who are going to schools like the ones in detroit that have mold and rodents in them . i saw that in south carolina . it's unfortunately across america . so what we have got to do is provide more opportunities earlier in the lives of every child . that's why i believe in supporting families , early childhood education , universal pre kindergarten , help kids be successful . and here is flint , we've got to do more to mitigate against the effects of lead , because too many kids are having the experiences i've been told about , where they're falling back in school , where they are having headaches because of the lead exposure . 
sanders well , i think mr . putin is going to regret what he is doing . i think that when he gets into that . . . 
sanders we need to join the rest of the industrialized world and guarantee health care to all people . so i . . . . . . my inaudible . 
sanders . . . seventy five percent of that money goes to large profitable corporations . 
o'malley i am the only person on this stage who has actually . . . 
clinton well , i respectfully disagree . i think we have achieved a great deal with the iranian nuclear agreement to put a lid on the iranian nuclear weapons program . that has to be enforced absolutely with consequences for iran at the slightest deviation from their requirements under the agreement . i do not think we should promise or even look toward normalizing relations because we have a lot of other business to get done with iran . yes , they have to stop being the main state sponsor of terrorism . yes , they have to stop trying to destabilize the middle east , causing even more chaos . yes , they've got to get out of syria . they've got to quit sponsoring hezbollah and hamas . they have got to quit trying to ship rockets into gaza that can be used against israel . we have a lot of work to do with iran before we ever say that they could move toward normalized relations with us . 
clinton well , i think it's pretty clear that they know that i will . you have two billionaire hedge fund managers who started a super pac and they're advertising against me in iowa as we speak . so they clearly think i'm going to do what i say i will do and you can look at what i did in the senate . i did introduce legislation to reign in compensation . i looked at ways that the shareholders would have more control over what was going on in that arena . and specifically said to wall street , that what they were doing in the mortgage market was bringing our country down . i've laid out a very aggressive plan to reign in wall street not just the big banks . that's a part of the problem and i am going right at them . i have a comprehensive , tough plan . but i went further than that . we have to go after what is called the shadow banking industry . those hedge funds . look at what happened in '08 , aig , a big insurance company , lehman brothers , an investment bank helped to bring our economy down . so , i want to look at the whole problem and that's why my proposal is much more comprehensive than anything else that's been put forth . 
sanders . . . of course there will be a limit , but when today you have massive levels of income and wealth inequality , when the middle class is disappearing , you have the highest rate of child poverty of almost any major country on earth . yes , in my view , the government of a democratic society has a moral responsibility to play a vital role in making sure all of our people have a decent standard of living . 
clinton well , first , judy , i have spent my entire adult life working toward making sure that women are empowered to make their own choices , even if that choice is not to vote for me . i believe that it's most important that we unleash the full potential of women and girls in our society . and i feel very strongly that i have an agenda , i have a record that really does respond to a lot of the specific needs that the women in our country face . so i'm going to keep making that case . i'm going to keep making sure that everything i've done , everything that i stand for is going to be well known . but i have no argument with anyone making up her mind about who to support . i just hope that by the end of this campaign there will be a lot more supporting me . that's what i'm working towards . 
sanders whoa , whoa , whoa . let's calm down a little bit , martin . 
sanders if you want to . . . 
clinton and solet's talk about issues . 
clinton and my analysis is that you are going to get more taxes out of middle class families . i'm the only person . . . 
sanders well , i'm blaming the trade policies . you know what ? this is an amazing thing which i didn't know until recently , and i wonder how many people did know this . 
clinton anderson , i just want to finish , because this i know some of the parents from sandy hook . i want people in this audience to think about what it must feel like to send off your first grader , little backpack , maybe , on his or her back , and then the next thing you hear is that somebody has come to that school using an automatic weapon , an ar 15 , and murdered those children . now , they are trying to prevent that from happening to any other family . 
clinton well , karen , i do agree that we have to end the revolving door . i strongly support a piece of legislation from senator tammy baldwin that would do just that . and i will be looking for people who will put the interests of consumers first , who will do more to try to make sure main street flourishes . and i will very much reach out and ask for advice as to who should be appointed , including to senator warren and many of my other former colleagues in the senate . but i think it's important also to look at what we want to accomplish . you know , in the debates we've had maybe this is the seventh or so senator sanders is always criticizing the two recent democratic presidents president clinton and president obama . and that's fine , but i wish he would criticize and join me in criticizing george w . bush , who i think wrecked the economy and created the conditions for the great recession . you know , at the end of the '90s , we had 23 million new jobs . incomes went up for everybody . we were talking earlier about what needs to be done for latinos and african americans . well , we were doing it by the end of the '90s . median family income went up 17 percent . for minorities , it went up even more . along came the republicans , trickle down economics one of the worst ideas since snake oil was put back into place . and we ended up with the great recession . president obama had to rescue the economy . and i don't think he gets the credit he deserves for doing that . 
sanders let me just say . . . 
sanders i would just . . . 
sanders thank you . looking forward to it . 
clinton well , in addition to the nra , the health insurance companies , the drug companies , the iranians . laughter probably the republicans . laughter and applause 
o'malley oh . all right . 
sanders a couple of years ago , i had the opportunity to go on a congressional delegation . and i went to one of these turkish refugee camps right on the border of syria . and what a sad sight that was men , women , children forced out of their homes . and turkey , by the way , did a very decent thing , providing what was reasonable housing and conditions for those people . it seems to me that given our history as a nation that has been a beacon of hope for the oppressed , for the downtrodden , that i very strongly disagree with those republican candidates who say , you know what , we've got to turn our backs on women and children who left their home with nothing , nothing at all . that is not what america is supposed to be about . so i believe that working with europe and , by the way , you know , we've got some very wealthy countries there in that part of the world . you got kuwait and you got qatar and you got saudi arabia . they have a responsibility , as well . but i think this is a worldwide that the entire world needs to come together to deal with this horrific refugee crisis we're seeing from syria and afghanistan , as well . 
clinton well , let's do that . let's talk about that . let's talk about that . 
sanders well , that's you might want to ask . . . 
o'malley here . here . 
clinton you know , senator , what i am concerned about , is not disagreement on issues , saying that this is what i would rather do , i don't agree with the president on that , calling the president weak , calling him a disappointment , calling several times that he should have a primary opponent when he ran for re election in 2012 , you know , i think that goes further than saying we have our disagreements . as a senator , yes , i was a senator . i understand we can disagree on the path forward . but those kinds of personal assessments and charges are ones that i find particularly troubling . 
o'malley senator senator , excuse me . crosstalk 
sanders it is it is absolutely inaccurate . 
clinton well , of course i would . and i have supported . . . . . . i have supported the fight for 15 . i am proud to have the endorsement of most of the unions that have led the fight for 15 . i was proud to stand on the stage with governor cuomo , with seiu and others who have been leading this battle and i will work as hard as i can to raise the minimum wage . i always have . i supported that when i was in the senate . 
clinton 
clinton well , of course , each of these cases needs to be looked at individually and analyzed . part of the problem that we have currently in the middle east is that assad has hung on to power with the very strong support of russia and iran and with the proxy of hezbollah being there basically fighting his battles . so i don't think you can paint with a broad brush . this is an incredibly complicated region of the world . it's become more complicated . and many of the fights that are going on are not ones that the united states has either started or have a role in . the shi'a sunni split . the dictatorships have suppressed people's aspirations . the increasing globalization without any real safety valve for people to have a better life . we saw that in egypt . we saw a dictator overthrown . we saw a muslim brotherhood president installed , and then we saw him ousted and the army back . so , i think we've got to understand the complexity of the world that we are facing and no place is more so than in the middle east . 
sanders let me say this . let me say let me say something that may not be great politics . but i think the secretary is right , and that is that the american people are sick and tired of hearing about your damn e mails . 
clinton i have said the . . . 
clinton i will put a price tag . my price tag is about 100 billion a year . and again , paid for . and what i have said is i will not throw us further into debt . i believe i can get the money that i need by taxing the wealthy , by closing loopholes , the things that we are way overdue for doing . and i think once i'm in the white house we will have enough political capital to be able to do that . but i am conscious of the fact that we have to also be very clear , especially with young people , about what kind of government is going to do what for them and what it will cost . 
sanders . . . not secretary clinton's position . 
sanders and i also voted and helped lead the effort against the war in iraq , which will go down in history as one of the worst foreign blunders foreign policy blunders in the history of our country . i voted against the first gulf war , which set the stage , i believe , for the second iraq war . and what i believe right now , and i believe this is terribly important , is the united states of america cannot succeed , or be thought of as the policeman of the world , that when there's an international crisis all over the world , in france and in the u . k . or hey , just call up the american military and the american taxpayers , they're going to send the troops . and if they have to be in the middle east for 20 or 30 years no problem . 
clinton i am not concerned about it . i am not worried about it and no democrat or american should be either . 
clinton i will not deport children . i would not deport children . i do not want to deport family members either , jorge . i want to , as i said , prioritize who would be deported violent criminals , people planning terrorist attacks , anybody who threatens us . that's a relatively small universe . 
sanders let me just reiterate just reiterate so there is no confusion , decades ago , before it was popular , in a rural state with no gun control , bernie sanders said , let's ban assault weapons , not see them distributed in the united states of america . 
clinton i think that is the smartest way to be able to move forward because if you go to 12 it would be the highest historical average we've ever had . 
clinton whatever they decide to do , that's fine . 
sanders that is . . . . . . madam secretary , that is a low blow . i have worked with president obama for the last seven years . when president obama came into office we were losing 800 , 000 jobs a month , 800 , 000 jobs a month . we had a 1 . 4 trillion deficit . and the world's financial system is on the verge of collapse . as a result of his efforts and the efforts of joe biden against unprecedented , i was there in the senate , unprecedented republican obstructionism , we have made enormous progress . but you know what ? last i heard we lived in a democratic society . last i heard , a united states senator had the right to disagree with the president , including a president who has done such an extraordinary job . so i have voiced criticisms . you're right . maybe you haven't . i have . but i think to suggest that i have voiced criticism , this blurb that you talk about , you know what the blurb said ? the blurb said that the next president of the united states has got to be aggressive in bringing people into the political process . that's what i said . that is what i believe . president obama and i are friends . as you know , he came to vermont to campaign for me when he was a senator . i have worked for his re election . his first election and his re election . but i think it is really unfair to suggest that i have not been supportive of the president . i have been a strong ally with him on virtually every issue . do senators have the right to disagree with the president ? have you ever disagreed with a president ? i suspect you may have . 
clinton we are going . . . . . . we are . . . . . . we are going . . . 
clinton well , as someone who as someone who has a little bit of experience standing up to the health insurance industry , that spent , you know . . . . . . many , many millions of dollars attacking me , and probably will so again , because of what i believe we can do building on the affordable care act , i think it's important to point out that there are a lot of reasons we have the health care system we have today . i know how much money influences the political decision making . that's why i'm for huge campaign finance reform . however , we started a system that had private health insurance . and even during the affordable care act debate , there was an opportunity to vote for what was called the public option . in other words , people could buy in to medicare , and even when the democrats were in charge of the congress , we couldn't get the votes for that . so , what i'm saying is really simple . this has been the fight of the democratic party for decades . we have the affordable care act . let's make it work . let's take the models that states are doing . we now have driven costs down to the lowest they've been in 50 years . now we've got to get individual costs down . that's what i'm planning to do . 
o'malley that's right . 
webb i will well , you've let a lot of people go over their time . i would say this . . . 
sanders no , i have not . 
sanders . . . a part of that . 
sanders well , let me talk about polling . laughter as secretary clinton well knows , when this campaign began she was 50 points ahead of me . we were all of three percentage points . guess what ? in iowa , new hampshire , the race is very , very close . maybe we're ahead new hampshire . cheering in terms of polling , guess what ? we are running ahead of secretary clinton . in terms of taking on my taking on my good friend , donald trump , beating him by 19 points in new hampshire , 13 points in the last national poll that we saw . to answer your question . when the african american community becomes familiar with my congressional record and with our agenda , and with our views on the economy , and criminal justice just as the general population has become more supportive , so will the african american community , so will the latino community . we have the momentum , we're on a path to a victory . applause and cheering 
clinton and that is important , because now we have a u . n . security council that will enable us to do that . and , you know , with all due respect , senator , you voted for regime change with respect to libya . you joined the senate in voting to get rid of gadhafi , and you asked that there be a security council validation of that with a resolution . all of these are very difficult issues . i know that ; i've been dealing with them for a long time . and , of course , we have to continue to do what is necessary when someone like gadhafi , a despot with american blood on his hands , is overturned . but i'll tell you what would have happened , if we had not joined with our european partners and our arab partners to assist the people in libya , you would be looking at syria . now the libyans are turning their attention to try to dislodge isis from its foothold and begin to try to move together to have a unified nation . 
sanders . . . and saying , please , do the right thing . . . 
clinton well , i think it's an important point the president made in his state of the union . and here's what i would say . i will go anywhere , to meet with anyone , at any time to find common ground . that's what i did as a first lady , when i worked with both democrats and republicans to get the children's health insurance program , when i worked with tom delay , one of the most partisan of republicans , to reform the adoption and foster care system . what i did , working in the senate , where i crossed the aisle often , working even with the senator from south carolina , lindsey graham , to get tricare for national guardsmen and women . and it's what i did as secretary of state , on numerous occasions , and most particularly , rounding up two thirds votes in order to pass a treaty that lowered the nuclear weapons in both russia and the united states . so i know it's hard , but i also know you've got to work at it every single day . i look out here , i see a lot of my friends from the congress . and i know that they work at it every single day . because maybe you can't only find a little sliver of common ground to cooperate with somebody from the other party , but who knows . if you're successful there , maybe you can build even more . that's what i would do . 
sanders absolutely , i agree . look , that bill had some sensible provisions in it . it had the banning of bullets that pierce policemen's armor . is that a good thing ? i think we would want to get rid of that . particular legislation had safety locks on guns so the kids do not pick them up and shoot them . that bill had bad things in it . what i have said . . . 
clinton well , first of all , i want to make sure every child gets health care . that's why i helped to create the children's health insurance program , and i want to support states that are expanding health care and including undocumented children and others . i want to open up the opportunity for immigrants to be able to buy in to the exchanges under the affordable care act . i think to go beyond that , as i understand what governor o'malley has recommended , so that they would get the same subsidies . i think that is it raises so many issues . it would be very difficult to administer , it needs to be part of a comprehensive immigration reform , when we finally do get to it . 
sanders . . . i'll tell you what i say . . . 
clinton well , jorge , there's a lot of questions in there . and i'm going to give the same answer i've been giving for many months . it wasn't the best choice . i made a mistake . it was not prohibited . it was not in any way disallowed . and as i have said and as now has come out , my predecessors did the same thing and many other people in the government . but here's the cut to the chase facts . i did not send or receive any emails marked classified at the time . what you are talking about is retroactive classification . and the reason that happens is when somebody asks or when you are asked to make information public , i asked all my emails to be made public . then all the rest of the government gets to weigh in . and some other parts of the government , we're not exactly sure who , has concluded that some of the emails should be now retroactively classified . they've just said the same thing to former secretary colin powell . they have said , we're going to retroactively classify emails you sent personally . now i think he was right when he said this is an absurdity . and i think that what we have got here is a case of overclassification . 
sanders yes . 
clinton well , let's remember what was going on . we had a murderous dictator , gadhafi , who had american blood on his hands , as i'm sure you remember , threatening to massacre large numbers of the libyan people . we had our closest allies in europe burning up the phone lines begging us to help them try to prevent what they saw as a mass genocide , in their words . and we had the arabs standing by our side saying , we want you to help us deal with gadhafi . our response , which i think was smart power at its best , is that the united states will not lead this . we will provide essential , unique capabilities that we have , but the europeans and the arabs had to be first over the line . we did not put one single american soldier on the ground in libya . and i'll say this for the libyan people . . . 
sanders he sure did . 
sanders yeah . 
sanders it is one thing , as the secretary indicated , to talk about workers . i'm sure i have contributions , you have contributions from workers in every industry in the country . but , as i understand it , 43 lobbyists for the fossil fuel industry maxed out , gave the maximum amount of money to secretary clinton's campaign . now , that's not saying and , then some people say , well , given the hundreds of millions of dollars she raises it's a small amount . that's true . but , that does not mean to say that the lobbyists thought she was a pretty good bet on this issue . now , what i think is when we look at climate change now , we have got to realize that this is a global environmental crisis of unprecedented urgency . cheering and applause and , it is not good enough . you know , if we , god forbid , were attacked tomorrow the whole country would rise up and say we got an enemy out there and we got to do something about it . that was what 9 11 was about . we have an enemy out there , and that enemy is going to cause drought and floods and extreme weather disturbances . there's going to be international conflict . i am proud , wolf , that i have introduced the most comprehensive climate change legislation . . . 
sanders secretary clinton is right . in the 1990s , we created a whole lot of jobs . good . and i supported many of your husband's initiatives . but in the 1990s , you know what we also did ? we deregulated wall street , which allowed wall street to end up destroying our economy . we passed nafta and other disastrous trade agreements which had a horrendous impact on african americans in particular , in flint , in detroit and all across this country . so when we talk about the '90s , you're right . a lot of good things happened , but a lot of bad things happened . 
sanders yeah , let me . . . 
clinton yes . 
o'malley yeah , david , look , for crying out loud , our country has been attacked , we have pressing issues involving how we're going to adapt to this changing era of warfare . our economy people are working harder and being left behind . you want to know why things don't get done in washington ? because for the last 24 hours , with those issues being so urgent to people as they tune in tonight , wondering how they're even be able to buy presents for their kids . instead , we're listening to the bickering back and forth . maybe that is normal politics in washington , but that is not the politics of higher purpose that people expect from our party . we need to address our security issues , we need to address the economic issues around the kitchen table . and if people want a more high minded politics and want to move our country forward , go on to martinomalley . com and help my campaign move our country forward . 
webb look , there are two fundamental issues that are involved in this discussion . we need to pay respect to both of them . the first is the issue of who should be kept from having guns and using firearms . and we have done not a good job on that . a lot of them are criminals . and a lot of the people are getting killed are members of gangs inside our urban areas . and a lot of them are mentally incapacitated . and the shooting in virginia tech in '07 , this individual had received medical care for mental illness from three different professionals who were not allowed to share the information . so we do need background checks . we need to keep the people who should not have guns away from them . but we have to respect the tradition in this country of people who want to defend themselves and their family from violence . 
clinton you know , i think since since senator standers followed up on this . . . 
sanders can i get a can i just get a very brief response ? very brief . 
sanders absolutely . that was a very arbitrary decision . what that real debate was about , as you may or may not know , was about how long it would take for the instant background check to go into effect . i wanted that instant background check to go into effect as soon as possible . that was the most important part of that bill . 
sanders i have a problem with that , martha . what i believe has got to happen is there must be an international coalition , including russia , a well coordinated effort . but i agree , as i mentioned a moment ago , with king abdullah . this is a war for the soul of islam . the troops on the ground should not be american troops . they should be muslim troops . i believe that countries like saudi arabia and qatar have got to step up to the plate , have got to contribute the money that we need , and the troops that we need , to destroy isis with american support . 
clinton well , chuck . . . 
sanders i know that . but point being is that progressives did vote against that for that reason . my view right now and always has been is that when you have 11 million undocumented people in this country , we need comprehensive immigration reform , we need a path toward citizenship , we need to take people out of the shadows . 
o'malley but it's a lot safer . it's saved a lot of lives along the way , senator . 
chafee it's certainly the chaos in the middle east . there's no doubt about it . 
clinton well lester , i spent a lot of time last week being outraged by what's happening in flint , michigan and i think every single american should be outraged . we've had a city in the united states of america where the population which is poor in many ways and majority african american has been drinking and bathing in lead contaminated water . and the governor of that state acted as though he didn't really care . he had request for help and he had basically stone walled . i'll tell you what , if the kids in a rich suburb of detroit had been drinking contaminated water and being bathed in it , there would've been action . so i sent my top campaign aide down there to talk to the mayor of flint to see what i could to help . i issued a statement about what we needed to do and then i went on a t . v . show and i said , it was outrageous that the governor hadn't acted and within two hours he had . 
sanders anyone who wants to check my record in taking on wall street , in fighting against the deregulation of wall street when wall street put billions of dollars in lobbying , in campaign contributions to get the government off their backs . they got the government off their backs . turns out that they were crooks , and they destroyed our economy . i think it's time to put the government back on their backs . 
sanders sure . sure . the obvious decision is when the greed and recklessness and illegal behavior of wall street brought this country into the worst economic downturn since the great recession the great depression of the '30s , when millions of people lost their jobs , and their homes , and their life savings , the obvious response to that is that you've got a bunch of fraudulent operators and that they have got to be broken up . that was my view way back , and i introduced legislation to do that . now , secretary clinton was busy giving speeches to goldman sachs for 225 , 000 a speech . so the problem response the proper response in my view is we should break them up . and that's what my legislation does . 
clinton well , i'm surprised she says that , because california has had a paid leave program for a number of years . and it's . . . 
clinton well , with respect to syria , i really do appreciate the efforts that secretary kerry has made . the agreement on humanitarian relief now needs to be implemented , because there are enclaves that are literally filled with starving people throughout syria . the agreement on a cease fire , though , is something that has to be implemented more quickly than the schedule that the russians agreed to . you know , the russians wanted to buy time . are they buying time to continue their bombardment on behalf of the assad regime to further decimate what's left of the opposition , which would be a grave disservice to any kind of eventual cease fire ? so i know secretary kerry is working extremely hard to try to move that cease fire up as quickly as possible . but i would add this . you know , the security council finally got around to adopting a resolution . at the core of that resolution is an agreement i negotiated in june of 2012 in geneva , which set forth a cease fire and moving toward a political resolution , trying to bring the parties at stake in syria together . this is incredibly complicated , because we've got iran as a big player , in addition to russia . we have saudi arabia , turkey , and others who have very important interests in their view . this is one of the areas i've disagreed with senator sanders on , who has called for iranian troops trying to end civil war in syria , which i think would be a grave mistake . putting iranian troops right on the border of the golan right next to israel would be a nonstarter for me . trying to get iran and saudi arabia to work together , as he has suggested in the past , is equally a nonstarter . so let's support what secretary kerry and the president are doing , but let's hope that we can accelerate the cease fire , because i fear that the russians will continue their bombing , try to do everything they can to destroy what's left of the opposition . and remember , the russians have not gone after isis or any of the other terrorist groups . so as we get a cease fire and maybe some humanitarian corridors , that still leaves the terrorist groups on the doorstep of others in syria , turkey , lebanon , jordan , and the like . so we've got some real work to do , and let's try to make sure we actually implement what has been agreed to with the russians . 
o'malley may i offer a different generation's perspective on this ? 
sanders well , i think that they're be pretty smart , because i think a lot of the states will do the right thing , and i think those states that don't will pay a heavy penalty . bottom line here is , in the year 2015 , we should look at a college degree the same way we looked at a high school degree 50 or 60 years ago . if you want to make it into the middle class i'm not saying in all cases we need plumbers , and we need carpenters , and electricians , that's for sure , and they should get help as well . but bottom line now , is in america , in the year 2015 , any person who has the ability and the desire should be able to get an education , college education , regardless of the income of his or her family . and we must substantially lower , as my legislation does , interest rates on student debt . 
clinton well , first karen , obviously it's painful for me to hear that . and i do take responsibility . when you're in public life , even if you believe that it's not an opinion that you think is fair or founded , you do have to take responsibility . and i do . and i also have , you know , very much committed to the best of my ability my energies and efforts to helping people . that's something that i care deeply about . and i will continue to do that , to demonstrate by my past actions and my present levels of commitment and plans that people can count on me . that is certainly what happened to me in new york , where people got to know me . they saw me in action . and they did . look , i have said before and it won't surprise anybody to hear me say it , this is not easy for me . it's not easy to do what i think is right , to help people , to even the odds , to hear a story like the woman's story we just heard . and to know that i can make a difference and i want to in every way possible . i am not a natural politician , in case you haven't noticed , like my husband or president obama . so i have a view that i just have to do the best i can , get the results i can , make a difference in people's lives , and hope that people see that i'm fighting for them and that i can improve conditions economically and other ways that will benefit them and their families . 
sanders secretary clinton did not answer one simple question . 
sanders . . . guns as safe as possible , but i would disagree on that . 
clinton well , i would just repeat that . 
clinton judy , i think that the best analysis that i've seen based on senator sanders plans is that it would probably increase the size of the federal government by about 40 , but what is most concerning to me is that in looking at the plans let's take healthcare for example . last week in a cnn town hall , the senator told a questioner that the questioner would spend about 500 dollars in taxes to get about 5 , 000 dollars in healthcare . every progressive economist who has analyzed that says that the numbers don't add up , and that's a promise that cannot be kept , and it's really important now that we are getting into the rest of the country that both of us are held to account for explaining what we are proposing because , especially with healthcare , this is not about math . this is about people's lives , and we should level with the american people about what we can do to make sure they get quality affordable healthcare . 
sanders i'll tell him . in my view , secretary clinton , you do not congress does not regulate wall street . wall street regulates congress . and we have gotta break off these banks . going to them . . . 
clinton . . . just let me finish . the rights and the autonomy that they deserve . and , let me say this , if yasser arafat had agreed with my husband at camp david in the late 1990s to the offer then prime minister barat put on the table , we would have had a palestinian state for 15 years . cheering and applause 
clinton and let me . . . 
webb can i . . . crosstalk 
clinton wait a minute . i think it's only fair to put on the record , senator sanders voted in the senate for a resolution calling for ending the gadhafi regime and asking that the u . n . be brought in , either a congressional vote or a u . n . security council vote . we got a u . n . security council vote . now , i understand that this is very difficult . and i'm not standing here today and saying that libya is as far along as tunisia . we saw what happened in egypt . i cautioned about a quick overthrow of mubarak , and we now are back with basically an army dictatorship . this is a part of the world where the united states has tried to play two different approaches . one , work with the tough men , the dictators , for our own benefit and promote democracy . that's a hard road to walk . but i think it's the right road for us to try to travel . 
clinton i will tell you what , anderson , after i investigated it , i concluded they did and here's why . there two big plane manufacturers in the world , there's airbus and boeing . airbus does everything it can to get contracts to sell planes everywhere in the world . we don't have as quite an aggressive outreach from our government . i did go in many places around the world to sell american products because the alternatives were usually european , asian , primarily chinese products . that to me was an unacceptable concession . so yes , boeing and other big companies get support just like their competitors do from the companies that they are from in the countries that provide the support . 
sanders absolutely . 
clinton . . . into my mouth and say something . . . 
clinton as ias i certainly recall , the question was to meet with without conditions . and you're right , i was against that . i was against it then i would be against it now . 
clinton i do and this is an important issue and i know we'll get to a lot of other critical ones as well . i actually agree with governor o'malley about the need for common sense gun safety measures . and i applaud his record in maryland . i just wish he wouldn't misrepresent mine . i have been for the brady bill , i have been against assault weapons . i have voted not to give gun makers and sellers immunity . and i also know that and i'm glad to see this senator sanders has really moved in face of the facts about what we're confronting in our country . i know that he has said in the two previous that he wants to take on this immunity issue because we need to send a strong message to the gun manufacturers , to the sellers , to the gun lobby . and i would hope , senator sanders , that you would join the democrats who are trying to close the charleston loophole , that you would sponsor or co sponsor legislation to remove the absolute immunity . we need to move on this consensus that exists in the country . it's no longer enough just to say the vast majority of americans want common sense gun safety measures including gun owners . we need , and only the three of us will do this , nobody on the republican side will even admit there's a problem . and in whatever way the three of us can we need to move this agenda forward and begin to deal with the gun lobby and the intimidation that they present . 
clinton well , good evening . and i want to thank the congressional black caucus institute and the people of charleston for hosting us here on the eve of martin luther king day tomorrow . you know , i remember well when my youth minister took me to hear dr . king . i was a teenager . and his moral clarity , the message that he conveyed that evening really stayed with me and helped to set me on a path to service . i also remember that he spent the last day of his life in memphis , fighting for dignity and higher pay for working people . and that is our fight still . we have to get the economy working and incomes rising for everyone , including those who have been left out and left behind . we have to keep our communities and our country safe . we need a president who can do all aspects of the job . i understand that this is the hardest job in the world . i'm prepared and ready to take it on and i hope to earn your support to be the nominee of the democratic party and the next president of the united states . 
clinton . . . wait a minute . 
sanders . . . and that i am not a great fan of regime change . 
clinton but i'll be there . i'll answer their questions . but tonight , i want to talk not about my e mails , but about what the american people want from the next president of the united states . 
sanders let me let me just say this . what a president of the united states has got to do and what is his or her major , i think , responsibility is to , a , make certain that we keep our people safe , that we work with allies around the world to protect democratic values , that we do all that we can to create a world of peace and prosperity . i voted against the war in iraq because i listened very carefully to what president bush and vice president cheney had to say and i didn't believe them . and if you go to my web site , berniesanders . com , what you find is not only going to help lead the opposition to that war , but much of what i feared would happen when i spoke on the floor of the house , in fact , did happen in terms of the instability that occurred . now i think an area in kind of a vague way , or not so vague , where secretary clinton and i disagree is the area of regime change . look , the truth is that a powerful nation like the united states , certainly working with our allies , we can overthrow dictators all over the world . and god only knows saddam hussein was a brutal dictator . we could overthrow assad tomorrow if we wanted to . we got rid of gadhafi . but the point about foreign policy is not just to know that you can overthrow a terrible dictator , it's to understand what happens the day after . and in libya , for example , the united states , secretary clinton , as secretary of state , working with some other countries , did get rid of a terrible dictator named gadhafi . but what happened is a political vacuum developed . isis came in , and now occupies significant territory in libya , and is now prepared , unless we stop them , to have a terrorist foothold . but this is nothing new . this has gone on 50 or 60 years where the united states has been involved in overthrowing governments . mossadegh back in 1953 . nobody knows who mossadegh was , democratically elected prime minister of iran . he was overthrown by british and american interests because he threatened oil interests of the british . and as a result of that , the shah of iran came in , terrible dictator . the result of that , you had the iranian revolution coming in , and that is where we are today . unintended consequences . so i believe as president i will look very carefully about unintended consequences . i will do everything i can to make certain that the united states and our brave men and women in the military do not get bogged down in perpetual warfare in the middle east . 
clinton everything i just said will improve the living conditions , and i've spent a lot of time and effort talking to and mostly listening to latinos . jobs are the number one issue , with rising incomes . close behind is education . every child deserves a good teacher in a good school , regardless of the zip code that they live in . following behind that is health care and how important it is to continue to build on the affordable care act and provide access to health care . and then there are a number of other issues comprehensive immigration reform certainly at the top . 
clinton well thanks for the question and congratulations on five million viewers on youtube , that's quite an accomplishment . look , this election is mostly about the future and therefore it is of greatest urgency for young people . i've laid out my ideas about what we can do to make college affordable ; how we can help people pay off their student debts and save thousands of dollars , how we can create more good jobs because a lot of the young people that i talk with are pretty disappointed the economic prospects they feel their facing . so making community college free , making it possible to attend a public college or university with debt free tuition , looking for ways to protect our rights especially from the concerted republican assault ; on voting rights , on women's rights , on gay rights , on civil rights , on workers rights . and i know how much young people value their independence , their autonomy , and their rights . so i think this is an election where we have to pull young people and older people together to have a strategy about how we're going to encourage even more american's to vote because it absolutely clear to me . . . 
clinton . . . system and that will be my highest priority . 
sanders just to set the record straight , i very strongly supported the agreement which makes certain that iran does not get a nuclear weapon . 
clinton look , i think that the president's decision to go after the chemical weapons once there was a potential opportunity to build on when the russians opened that door resulted in a very positive outcome . we were able to get the chemical weapons out . i know from my own experience as secretary of state that we were deeply worried about assad's forces using chemical weapons because it would have had not only a horrific affect on people in syria , but it could very well have affected the surrounding states , jordan , israel , lebanon , turkey . so getting those chemical weapons out was a big deal , but . . . 
clinton the gun manufacturers sell guns to make as much money as they can make . 
clinton but senator sanders , if i can . . . you know , i have to say i'm not sure whether we're talking about the plan you just introduced tonight , or we're talking about the plan you introduced nine times in the congress . but the fact is , we have the affordable care act . that is one of the greatest accomplishments of president obama , of the democratic party , and of our country . and we have already seen 19 million americans get insurance . we have seen the end of pre existing conditions keeping people from getting insurance . we have seen women no longer paying more for our insurance than men . and we have seen young people , up to the age of 26 , being able to stay on their parent's policy . 
clinton you know , i was a senator from new york after 9 11 , and we spent countless hours trying to figure out how to protect the city and the state from perhaps additional attacks . one of the best things that was done , and george w . bush did this and i give him credit , was to reach out to muslim americans and say , we're in this together . you are not our adversary , you are our partner . and we also need to make sure that the really discriminatory messages that trump is sending around the world don't fall on receptive ears . he is becoming isis's best recruiter . they are going to people showing videos of donald trump insulting islam and muslims in order to recruit more radical jihadists . so i want to explain why this is not in america's interest to react with this kind of fear and respond to this sort of bigotry . 
o'malley andrea andrea andrea . crosstalk 
clinton that's what i'm telling you . now i don't want because i'm not contradicting what i told you in the interview . asylum is a particular legal process . i'd like to see it changed . i'd like to see us give more support to people who come fleeing the terrible violence that they do . but under our law , we have a process we have to go through which is different . 
sanders well , to put that in a context , judy , i think we have to understand that in the last 30 years in this country there has been a massive transfer of wealth going from the hands of working families into the top one tenth of 1 whose percentage of wealth has doubled . in other words , the very rich are getting richer , almost everybody is going getting poorer . what i believe is the united states , in fact , should join the rest of the industrialized world and guarantee healthcare to all people . our medicare for all single payer proposal will save the average middle class family 5 , 000 a year . i do believe that in the year 2016 we have to look in terms of public education as colleges as part of public education making public colleges and universities tuition free . i believe that when real unemployment is close to 10 , and when our infrastructure , our roads , our bridges , our water systems , flint , michigan comes to mind . our waste water plants , our rail , our airports , in many places are disintegrating . yeah , we can create 13 million jobs by rebuilding our infrastructure at a cost of a trillion dollars . 
clinton well , first of all , it's great to be here in new york , and i am delighted to . . . . . . have this chance to discuss the issues that are important to our future . i was so honored to serve as a senator from new york for eight years . . . . . . and to work to provide opportunity for all of our citizens to make it possible that we could knock down the barriers that stand in the way of people getting ahead and staying ahead . and during those eight years , we faced some difficult challenges together . we faced 9 11 . we worked hard to rebuild new york . i was particularly concerned about our first responders and others who'd been affected in their health by what they had experienced . we worked hard to bring jobs from buffalo to albany and all parts of new york to give more hard working people a chance to really make the most out of their own talents . and we worked hard to really keep new york values at the center of who we are and what we do together . and that is that is exactly what i want to do as your president . we will celebrate our diversity . we will work together , bringing us back to being united , setting some big , bold , progressive goals for america . that's what i'm offering in this campaign , to build on the work , to build on the value that we share here in new york , to take those to washington , and to knock down those barriers that in any way hold back not only individual americans , bur our country from reaching our full potential . that is what my campaign is about . 
sanders i agree with what the secretary said . we shouldn't be getting ahead of ourselves . and as i have said many times , you know , sometimes in these campaigns , things get a little bit out of hand . i happen to respect the secretary very much , i hope it's mutual . and on our worst days , i think it is fair to say we are 100 times better than any republican candidate . 
clinton i think with this kind of barbarism and nihilism , it's very hard to understand , other than the lust for power , the rejection of modernity , the total disregard for human rights , freedom , or any other value that we know and respect . historically , it is important to try to understand your adversary in order to figure out how they are thinking , what they will be doing , how they will react . i plead that it's very difficult when you deal with isis and organizations like that whose behavior is so barbaric and so vicious that it doesn't seem to have any purpose other than lust for killing and power and that's very difficult to put ourselves in the other shoe . crosstalk 
clinton all right . 
o'malley thank you . andrea , governors have led us to victory in two world wars by doing what america does best , and that is by joining forces with others by acting in coalition . and i believe that president obama is doing the right thing in this case . we need to learn the lessons from the past . we do need to provide the special special ops advisers , we need do need to provide the technical support , but over the long term , we need to develop new alliances . we need a much more proactive national security strategy that reduces these threats before they rise to a level where it feels like we need to pull for a division of marines . and i also want to add one other thing here . i appreciate the fact that in our debate , we don't use the term you hear republicans throwing around trying to look all vibrato and macho sending other kids kids into combat , they keep using the term boots on the ground . a woman in burlington , iowa said to me , governor , when you're with your colleagues , please don't refer to my son who has served two tours of duty in iraq as a pair of boots on the ground . now , we need to be mindful of learning the lessons of the past . 
sanders governor . . . 
o'malley anderson , i think there's lessons to be learned from benghazi . and those lessons are that we need to do a much better job as a nation of having human intelligence on the ground so that we know who the emerging next generation leaders are that are coming up to replace a dictator when his time on this planet ends . and i believe that's what chris stevens was trying to do . but he did not have the tools . we have failed as a country to invest in the human intelligence that would allow us to make not only better decisions in libya , but better decisions in syria today . and it's a huge national security failing . 
clinton well , you know , there are a lot of copy machines around . 
clinton but wait , i just want to say this senator . there is broad consensus , 92 percent in the most recently poll of americans want gun safety measures . . . 
sanders yes . look , this is a tragedy for new hampshire . it is a tragedy for my state of vermont . it is a tragedy all over this country . the number of heroin deaths are growing very , very significantly . what do we do ? well , for a start , this may seem like a radical idea , but i think we have got to tell the medical profession and doctors who are prescribing opiates and the pharmaceutical industry that they have got to start getting their act together , we cannot have this huge number of opiates out there throughout this country , where young people are taking them , getting hooked , and then going to heroin . second of all , and the reason i believe in a health care for all program , we need to understand that addiction is a disease , not a criminal activity . and that means and that means radically changing the way we deal with mental health and addiction issues . when somebody is addicted and seeking help , they should not have to wait three , four months in order to get that help . they should be able to walk in the door tomorrow and get a variety of treatments that work for them . so those are some of the areas that i think we've got to move on . 
sanders and that is why , by the way , that is why one of my top priorities , if elected president will be to overturn this outrageous citizens united supreme court inaudible . 
clinton well , i agree completely . i want to go further though . i want us to have an absolute commitment to getting rid of lead wherever it is because it's not only in water systems , it's also in soil , and it's in lead paint that is found mostly in older homes . that's why 500 , 000 children today have lead lead in their bodies . so , i want to do exactly what you said . we will commit to a priority to change the water systems , and we will commit within five years to remove lead from everywhere . we were making progress on this in the 1990's . i worked with then senator obama to get more money , more support to do more to remove lead . 
o'malley well , mr . cooney , we've actually been focusing on border security to the exclusion of talking about comprehensive immigration reform . in fact , if more border security and these and more and more deportations were going to bring our republican brothers and sisters to the table , it would have happened long ago . the fact of the matter is and let's say it in our debate , because you'll never hear this from that immigration bashing carnival barker , donald trump , the truth of the matter is . . . the truth of the matter is , net immigration from mexico last year was zero . fact check me . go ahead . check it out . but the truth of the matter is , if we want wages to go up , we've got to get 11 million of our neighbors out of off the book shadow economy , and into the full light of an american economy . that's what our parents and grandparents always did . that's what we need to do as a nation . yes , we must protect our borders . but there is no substitute for having comprehensive immigration reform with a pathway to citizenship for 11 million people , many of whom have known no other country but the united states of america . our symbol is the statue of liberty . it is not a barbed wire fence . 
o'malley no , what i would say is this is look , i was the first of the three of us to call for america to accept the 65 , 000 refugees we were asked to accept . and if this humanitarian crisis increases , we should accept more . 
clinton well , thank you . 
sanders let us be clear that the greed and recklessness and illegal behavior of wall street , where fraud is a business model , helped to destroy this economy and the lives of millions of people . check the record . in the 1990s and all due respect in the 1990s , when i had the republican leadership and wall street spending billions of dollars in lobbying , when the clinton administration , when alan greenspan said , what a great idea it would be to allow these huge banks to merge , bernie sanders fought them , and helped lead the opposition to deregulation . today , it is my view that when you have the three . . . 
sanders andrea , let me just say this . 
clinton . . . hillaryclinton . com , and read about it . but i guess the final thing that that i would say is this is the kind of debate we need to take to the republicans in the fall . 
sanders what i mean is that we need to have one of the larger voter turnouts in the world , not one of the lowest . we need to raise public consciousness . we need the american people to know what's going on in washington in a way that today they do not know . and when people come together in a way that does not exist now and are prepared to take on the big money interest , then we could bring the kind of change we need . 
o'malley david , there are wider vulnerabilities than when it comes to refugees . i met recently with some members of the chaldean christian communities and the wait times are a year , 18 months , 24 months . there is a pretty excruciating process that refugees go through . we need to invest more in terms of the other sort of visas and the other sort of waivers . 
clinton and i will also go after executives who are responsible for the decisions that have such bad consequences for our country . 
o'malley that's what i understand is the request from the international . . . 
clinton but what i have also said is that we've got to be smart about it , just the way governor cuomo was here in new york . if you look at it , we moved more quickly to 15 in new york city , more deliberately toward 12 , 12 . 50 upstate then to 15 . that is exactly my position . it's a model for the nation and that's what i will do as president . 
sanders well , this is what i would say , and the congressman was right . according to the statistics that i'm familiar with , a black male baby born today stands a one in four chance of ending up in the criminal justice system . fifty one percent of high school african american graduates are unemployed or underemployed . we have more people in jail today than any other country on earth . we're spending 80 billion locking people up , disproportionately latino and african american . we need , very clearly , major , major reform in a broken criminal justice system . from top to bottom . and that means when police officers out in a community do illegal activity kill people who are unarmed who should not be killed , they must be held accountable . it means that we end minimum sentencing for those people arrested . it means that we take marijuana out of the federal law as a crime and give states the freedom to go forward with legalizing marijuana . 
clinton . . . and stood with the minutemen vigilantes in their ridiculous , absurd efforts to , quote , hunt down immigrants . so look , i think the goal here is to elect a democratic senate , elect a democratic president and get to work immediately to get comprehensive immigration reform . 
sanders well , i if i might . i think the issue here is and i applaud secretary clinton . she did . she's the senator from new york . she worked and many of us supported you in trying to rebuild that devastation . but at the end of the day , wall street today has enormous economic and political power . their business model is greed and fraud . and for the sake of our economy , they must the major banks must be broken up . 
sanders . . . not just wealthy campaign contributors . 
sanders well , i think well , the answer is yes , and i think when we talk about god whether it is christianity , or judaism , or islam , or buddhism , what we are talking about is what all religions hold dear . and , that is to do unto others as you would like them to do unto you . i am here tonight , and i'm running for president . i'm a united states senator from my great state of vermont because i believe that , because i believe morally and ethically we do not have a right to turn our backs on children in flint , michigan who are being poisoned , or veterans who are sleeping out on the street . what i believe as the father of seven beautiful grandchildren , i want you to worry about my grandchildren , and i promise you i will worry about your family . we are in this together . 
webb . . . to the unelected , authoritarian government of china you do not own the south china sea . you do not have the right to conduct cyber warfare against tens of millions of american citizens . and in a webb administration , we will do something about that . 
o'malley anderson , we actually did this in my state of maryland . we passed . . . 
sanders i will , just a second . 
sanders secretary clinton called them out . oh my goodness , they must have been really crushed by this . and was that before or after you received huge sums of money by giving speaking engagements ? so they must have been very , very upset by what you did . look , here is the difference and here is the clear difference . these banks , in my view , have too much power . they have shown themselves to be fraudulent organizations endangering the well being of our economy . if elected president , i will break them up . we have got legislation to do that , end of discussion . 
clinton absolutely . and , you know , there are a number of programs that i think are duplicative and redundant and not producing the results that people deserve . there are a lot of training programs and education programs that i think can be streamlined and put into a much better format so that if we do continue them they can be more useful , in public schools , community colleges , and colleges and universities . i would like to take a hard look at every part of the federal government and really do the kind of analysis that would rebuild some confidence in people that we're taking a hard look about what we have , you know , and what we don't need anymore . and that's what i intend to do . 
o'malley inaudible 
o'malley . . . we need to make american 100 percent clean electric by 2050 . 
o'malley come on now . yeah , but look . it should always be going up . again , with all do respect to secretary clinton . . . 
sanders i was asked a question . 
clinton . . . in the 1990s , we got 23 million new jobs and incomes went up for everybody . 
sanders . . . i got it . 
sanders yeah , dana , here's the point every other major country on earth , every one , including some small countries , say that when a mother has a baby , she should stay home with that baby . we are the only major country . that is an international embarrassment that we do not provide family paid family and medical leave . second of all , the secretary is right . republicans tell us we can't do anything except give tax breaks to billionaires and cut social security , medicare , and medicaid . that's not what the american people want . 
clinton well , i'm certainly going to unite the party , but i'm noti'm not getting ahead of myself . i think that would be a little bit presumptuous . if i'm so fortunate as to be the nominee , the first person i will call to talk to about where we go and how we get it done will be senator sanders . 
o'malley . . . and in this case , we probably let our lust for regime toppling get ahead of the practical considerations for stability in that region . and i believe that one of the big failings in that region is a lack of human intelligence . we have not made the investments that we need to make to understand and to have relationships with future leaders that are coming up . that's what chris stevens was trying to do . but without the tools , without the support that was needed to that . and now what we have is a whole stretch now , of the coast of libya , 100 miles , 150 miles , that has now become potentially the next safe haven for isil . they go back and forth between syria and this region . we have to stop contributing to the creation of vacuums that allow safe havens to develop . 
clinton and you were . . . 
webb i'd have to say the enemy soldier that threw the grenade that wounded me , but he's not around right now to talk to . 
clinton well , let me . . . 
sanders and not just the few . 
clinton well , there's a lot that i would like to do to build on the successes of president obama , but also , as i'm laying out , to go beyond . and that's in my economic plans , how i would deal with the prescription drug companies , how i would deal with college , how i would deal with a full range of issues that i've been talking about throughout this campaign to go further . 
clinton well , my relationship with him , it's it's interesting . laughter it's one , i think , of respect . we've had some very tough dealings with one another . and i know that he's someone that you have to continuingly stand up to because , like many bullies , he is somebody who will take as much as he possibly can unless you do . and we need to get the europeans to be more willing to stand up , i was pleased they put sanctions on after crimea and eastern ukraine and the downing of the airliner , but we've got to be more united in preventing putin from taking a more aggressive stance in europe and the middle east . 
sanders isis , you forgot one . . . 
clinton well first , thanks to msnbc and thanks to all of you for holding this debate before the new hampshire primary . i am going to campaign as hard as i can between now and tuesday to earn your votes in that primary , and i hear some talk that people are trying to decide do they vote with their heart , do they vote with their head , i'm asking you to bring both your heart and your head to vote with you on tuesday because we have a lot of work that can only come because your heart is moved . you know , we didn't get to talk about the continuing struggles that americans face with racism , with sexism , with discrimination against the lgbt community , with new americans , with people with disabilities . yes , we have income inequality , we have other forms of inequality that we need to stand up against and absolutely diminish from our society . so i have been moved by my heart ever since i was a young woman about the age of a lot of senator sanders' supporters worrying what i can do to make a difference for my country , and i will bring that heart with me , but i will also tell you we've got to get our heads together to come up with the best answers to solve the problems so that people can have real differences in their lives that will make them better for now and into the future . 
o'malley . . . passed comprehensive gun safety legislation with a ban on combat assault weapons , david . and , look , there are profound differences . . . senator sanders voted against the brady bill . senator sanders voted to give immunity to gun dealers . and senator sanders voted against even research dollars to look into this public health issue . secretary clinton changes her position on this every election year , it seems , having one position in 2000 and then campaigning against president obama and saying we don't need federal standards . look , what we need on this issue is not more polls . we need more principle . when isil does training videos that say the easiest way to get a combat assault weapon in the united states of america is at a gun show , then we should all be waking up . we need comprehensive gun safety legislation and a ban on assault weapons . 
sanders i am in this race as a democrat . i have raised millions of dollars for my colleagues in the united states senate to help them get elected . i will do everything i can to open the democratic party to the young people who are flocking into our political campaign . cheering 
clinton . . . reforming foster care and adoption to the children's health insurance program , which insures . . . 
clinton that pose a risk to the financial sector . i want to go further and add to that . and , you know , governor , you have raised money on wall street . you raised a lot of money on wall street when you were the head of the democratic governor's association . . . 
clinton great . thank you . 
clinton you know , if we're going to argue about the 1990's instead of talking about the future , which i'd much prefer because i think every election is about the future , and you all deserve to know what we will do to help you have a brighter future but , if we are going to talk about the 1990's i think it's only fair to say that at the end of the 1990's , after two terms of my husband's presidency , the unemployment rate in michigan was 4 . 4 percent . there had been a net increase of 54 , 000 manufacturing jobs . there had been a net increase of 653 , 000 jobs overall . and , one of the ways jobs were brought to , and grown here in michigan was through something called the export import bank which helped a lot of businesses , particularly small businesses , be able to export around the world . senator sanders opposes that . i think we're in a race for exports . i think china , germany , everybody else supports their businesses . here in michigan there's been 11 billion dollars in recent years used to support exports , primarily from small businesses . i favor that , he's opposed it . i want to do everything i can for us to compete and win in the global economy . . . 
sanders let me interject here . 
sanders what is correct , and i'm disappointed that secretary clinton's campaign has made this criticism . it's a republican criticism . secretary clinton does know a lot about healthcare , and she understands , i believe , that a medicare for all , single payer program will substantially lower the cost of healthcare for middle class families . so , what we have got to acknowledge , and i hope the secretary does , is we are doing away with private health insurance premiums . so , instead of paying 10 , 000 dollars to blue cross , or blue shield , yes , some middle class families would be paying slightly more in taxes , but the result would be that that middle class family would be saving some 5 , 000 dollars in healthcare costs . a little bit more in taxes , do away with private health insurance premiums . it's a pretty good deal . 
sanders i want you all to think . what secretary clinton is saying is that the united states should continue to be the only major country on earth that doesn't guarantee health care to all of our people . i think if the rest of the world can do it , we can . and by the way , not only are we being ripped off by the drug companies , we are spending far , far more per capita on health care than any other major country on earth . you may not think the american people are prepared to stand up to the insurance companies or the drug companies . i think they are . and i think we can pass . . . 
clinton well , i'm running for president to do my very best to knock down every barrier that stands in the way of america realizing its potential and every american having a chance to live up to his or her god given potential . we have a lot of work to do . we have economic barriers . that's why i've laid out plans for more good jobs with rising incomes . we have barriers that stand in the way of quality health care . that's why i will build on the affordable care act . we have barriers to education . that's why i want to start early and provide debt free tuition , and deal with student debt so it is no longer the burden that weighs down so many young americans . and i do want to take on the barriers of systemic racism . i may not have experienced them , but i see the results every single day . so i'm asking for your support in the primary here in michigan on tuesday . i'm asking for it , and i will do whatever i can as the democratic nominee to run a campaign you'll be proud of . i don't intend to get into the gutter with whoever they nominate , but instead to lift our sights , to set big goals , to make it clear that america's best days can be and are ahead of us . 
clinton yes , you can because the question you were asking me were about children seeking asylum . and we have laws . that was the most critical thing i said . under our laws . i would like to see those laws changed . i would like see added to them , a guaranteed counsel and other support for children . but if you are asking about everyone who is already here , undocumented immigrants , the 11 12 million who are living here , my priorities are to deport violent criminals , terrorists , and anyone who threatens our safety . so i do not have the same policy as the current administration does . i think it's important that we move to our comprehensive immigration reform , but at the same time , stop the raids , stop the round ups , stop the deporting of people who are living here doing their lives , doing their jobs , and that's my priority . 
sanders yes , secretary clinton . . . crosstalk . . . you are a member of the establishment . 
clinton thank you very much , anderson . and thanks to all the viewers who tuned in tonight . i think what you did see is that , in this debate , we tried to deal with some of the very tough issues facing our country . that's in stark contrast to the republicans who are currently running for president . what you have to ask yourself is who amongst us has the vision for actually making the changes that are going to improve the lives of the american people ? who has the tenacity and the ability and the proven track record of getting that done ? now , i revere my late mother , and she gave me a lot of good advice . but one of the best pieces of advice she gave me was , you know , the issue is not whether or not you get knocked down . it's whether you get back up . america's been knocked down . that great recession , 9 million people lost their jobs , 5 million lost their homes , 13 trillion in wealth disappeared . and although we've made progress , we're standing but not running the way america needs to . my mission as president will be to raise incomes for hard working middle class families and to make sure that we get back to the basic bargain i was raised with if you work hard and you do your part , you should be able to get ahead and stay ahead . please join me in this campaign . please come and make it clear that america's best days are still ahead . thank you very much . 
chafee so there's still a lot more money to be had from this top echelon . i'm saying let's have another tier and put that back into the tax bracket . and that will generate 42 billion . 
clinton if i couldif i could . . . 
clinton this is a very important point in this debate , because i do believe in universal coverage . remember , i fought for it 25 years ago . i believe in it . and i know that thanks the affordable care act , we are now 90 percent of universal coverage . i will build on the affordable care act . i will take it further . i will reduce the cost . but i just respectfully disagree . between the republicans trying to repeal the first chance we've ever had to get to universal health care , and senator sanders wanting to throw us into a contentious debate over single payer , i think the smart approach is build on and protect the affordable care act . make it work . reduce the cost . 
sanders yes , i agree . 
sanders well , we do the best we don't know . and i should also say with regard to that 2007 immigration bill , as you may know , lulac , the major hispanic organization in his country , also opposed that bill as did many other latino organizations . but to your point , we have to do the best we can . i applaud president obama for his efforts on dapa and daca . and i think we have got to expand those efforts . 
clinton well , first of all , i do have a very comprehensive plan to create more jobs and i think that has to be at the center of our economic approach . and so i think it is important that we do more on manufacturing . i went to syracuse and laid out a 10 billion plan that would , i believe , really jump start advanced manufacturing . i have seen the results of what can happen when we have the government cooperating with business . and that's exactly what i will do . when i was secretary of state , i helped to lead the way to increased exports of american good around the world , which supports tens of thousands of jobs . so i think you've got to go at this with a sense of how to accomplish the goal we are setting more good jobs with rising incomes for people everywhere from inner cities to rural areas to every distressed community in america . and that's exactly what my plan would bring about . i think we have a pretty good record if we look at what happened . . . 
sanders you know , as i think secretary clinton knows , as we all know , there are bills in congress that have bad stuff , there are bills in congress that have good stuff . good stuff and bad stuff in the same bill . now , if i have voted against that bill , secretary clinton would be here tonight and she'd say , bernie sanders voted against the ban on assault weapons . bernie sanders voted against the violence against women act . those were provisions in the bill , as the secretary just indicated . so , in that bill there was some good provisions , i have been a fierce fighter against domestic violence ever since i was mayor in burlington . violence against women act has protected millions of women in this country , it was in that bill . the ban on assault weapons , that's what i have fought for my whole life . it was in that bill . now , what you are reading though is i went to the floor , as i recall , and that's what i said . i tried to get the death penalty aspects in that bill out . secretary clinton have a disagreement . i was then , and i am now opposed to the death penalty . so , to answer your question , what you read was a congressman who was torn , who said there are good things in that bill , there are bad things overall . i voted for it . but where we are right now is having more than 2 . 2 million people in jail more than any other country on earth . this is a campaign promise , at the end of my first term , we will not have more people in jail than any other country . 
sanders well , you can't simply withdraw tomorrow . wish we could , and allow , you know , the taliban or anybody else to reclaim that country . but what we must do , and what we have seen in recent months , is some progress in iraq , where finally the iraqi army , which has not been a particularly effective fighting force , retook ramadi . isis has lost i think 40 percent of the territory that it held in the last year . hopefully , and you know , one can't predict the future , that maybe our training and their fighting capabilities are improving and we are going to make some progress in destroying isis . 
clinton well , the only thing the only thing i can go on senator sanders . . . 
chafee thank you , anderson . thank you , cnn , and thank you facebook for organizing this debate . not only will americans be electing a new president next year , we also will be electing a world leader . voters should assess the candidate's experience , character and vision for the future as they make this important decision . i'm the only one running for president that has been a mayor , a united states senator , and a governor . as mayor , i brought labor peace to my city and kept taxes down . i was reelected three times . as a senator , i earned a reputation for courageous votes against the bush cheney tax cuts the favored the wealthy , against the tragedy of the iraq war , for environmental stewardship , for protection of our civil liberties . i served on the foreign relations committee and i chaired the middle east subcommittee for four years . as governor , i came in at the depths of the recession and we turned my state around . rhode island had the biggest drop of the unemployment rate over my four budgets of all but one state . it happens to be nevada , where we're having this debate . i'm very proud that over my almost 30 years of public service , i have had no scandals . i've always been honest . i have the courage to take the long term view , and i've shown good judgment . i have high ethical standards . as we look to the future , i want to address the income inequality , close the gap between the haves and the have nots . i want to address climate change , a real threat to our planet . and i believe in prosperity through peace . i want to end these wars . i look forward to the discussion ahead . thank you 
clinton well , if i i want to add , you know , again describing the problem is a lot easier than trying to solve it . and i have been involved , both as first lady with my husband's efforts , as a senator supporting the efforts that even the bush administration was undertaking , and as secretary of state for president obama , i'm the person who held the last three meetings between the president of the palestinian authority and the prime minister of israel . there were only four of us in the room , netanyahu , abbas , george mitchell , and me . three long meetings . and i was absolutely focused on what was fair and right for the palestinians . i was absolutely focused on what we needed to do to make sure that the palestinian people had the right to self government . and i believe that as president i will be able to continue to make progress and get an agreement that will be fair both to the israelis and the palestinians without ever , ever undermining israel's security . 
clinton yeah , but ii think it's fair to really ask what's behind that comment . you know , senator sanders has said he wants to run a positive campaign . i've tried to keep my disagreements over issues , as it should be . but time and time again , by innuendo , by insinuation , there is this attack that he is putting forth , which really comes down toyou know , anybody who ever took donations or speaking fees from any interest group has to be bought . and i just absolutely reject that , senator . and i really don't think these kinds of attacks by insinuation are worthy of you . and enough is enough . if you've got something to say , say it directly . but you will not find that i ever changed a view or a vote because of any donation that i ever received . 
clinton i very much appreciate that comment , bernie . it really is important that we go forward on this . i know that you now have your data back , and that there has been an agreement for an independent inquiry into what did happen . obviously , we were distressed when we learned of it , because we have worked very hard i said in the beginning of this campaign , we want to reach as many voters as possible , and we have tens of thousands of volunteers doing that , and entering data all the time to keep up with what people are telling us . and so , now that , i think , you know , we have resolved your data , we have agreed on an independent inquiry , we should move on . because i don't think the american people are all that interested in this . i think they're more interested in what we have to say about all the big issues facing us . 
clinton i'm going to do what i think will work which is both carrots and sticks . let me talk about the carrots . we're going to have a very clear set of proposals and incentives for manufacturing so that we change the way that companies think about making investments again in america . i have a comprehensive manufacturing plan that i will be implementing . we're also going to invest more on infrastructure as we both have said , it's woefully under resourced . that will put a lot of people to work . i want to do more to help small businesses , they are the source of two thirds of our jobs and we have to help them start and grow , particularly minority and women owned small businesses . we need to do more to help create clean energy as a source of good jobs but i am also going to go after companies . you know , when a company decides to leave like nabisco is leaving and they have gotten tax benefits from chicago and illinois to stay there , i will claw back the benefits . they will have to pay them back if they are leaving a place that actually invested in them . i am also going to go after companies like johnson controls in wisconsin . they came and got part of the bailout because they were an auto parts supplier and now they want to move headquarters to europe . they are going to have to pay an exit fee . we are going to stop this kind of job exporting and we are going to start importing and growing jobs again in our country . 
sanders this is a crisis we have got to deal with now . 
sanders yes . 
clinton well , let's just let's just follow up on this , because , you know , i've made it very clear that no bank is too big to fail , no executive too powerful to jail , and because of dodd frank , we now have in law a process that the president , the federal reserve , and others can use if any bank poses a systemic risk . i think that's a major accomplishment . i agree , however , it doesn't go far enough , because what it focuses on are the big banks , which senator sanders has talked about a lot , for good reason . i go further in the plan that i've proposed , which has been called the toughest , most effective , comprehensive plan for reining in the other risks that the financial system could face . it was an investment bank , lehman brothers , that contributed to our collapse . it was a big insurance company , aig . it was countrywide mortgage . my plan would sweep all of them into a regulatory framework so we can try to get ahead of what the next problems might be . and i believe that not only barney frank , paul krugman , and others , have said that what i have proposed is the most effective . it goes in the right direction . we have dodd frank . we can use it to break up the banks , if that's appropriate . but let's not kid ourselves . as we speak , there are new problems on the horizon . i want to get ahead of those , and that's why i've proposed a much more comprehensive approach to deal with all of these . . . crosstalk 
clinton you know , i have laid out a set of actions that build on what president obama was able to accomplish , building on the clean power plan , which is currently under attack by fossil fuels and the right in the supreme court , which is one of the reasons why we need to get the supreme court justice that president obama has nominated to be confirmed so that we can actually continue to make progress . i don't take a back seat to your legislation that you've introduced that you haven't been able to get passed . i want to do what we can do to actually make progress in dealing with the crisis . that's exactly what i have proposed . 
sanders thirdly , we have got to understand that in america , we should be thinking big , not small . 
webb 
clinton let's talk about the auto bailout because i think it's important for people to understand what happened . in december of 2008 , we were both in the senate , there was a vote on a free standing bill to rescue the auto industry . we both voted for it . was the right vote . unfortunately , it did not succeed . the republicans marshalled the votes against it . a month later , in january , a new piece of legislation was offered that contained the money that would be used for the auto rescue . then president elect obama before he'd even been sworn in sent word to all of us that he really hoped we would support it . he was still in the senate , i was still in the senate . and i voted for it . it was a hard vote . i'll tell you , it was a hard vote . a lot of the votes you make are hard votes . but the fact is the money that rescued the auto industry was in that bill . 
o'malley thank you . commercial break 
sanders absolutely . this is a responsibility for the u . s . justice department to get involved . whenever anybody in this country is killed while in police custody , it should automatically trigger a u . s . attorney general's investigation . second of all , and i speak as a mayor who worked very closely and well with police officers , the vast majority of whom are honest , hard working people trying to do a difficult job , but let us be clear . if a police officer breaks the law , like any public official , that officer must be held accountable . and thirdly , we have got to de militarize our police departments so they don't look like occupying armies . we've got to move toward community policing . and fourthly , we have got to make our police departments look like the communities they serve in their diversity . 
sanders . . . responding . all right ? when this campaign began , i said that we got to end the starvation minimum wage of 7 . 25 , raise it to 15 . secretary clinton said let's raise it to 12 . there's a difference . and , by the way , what has happened is history has outpaced secretary clinton , because all over this country , people are standing up and they're saying 12 is not good enough , we need 15 an hour . 
webb thank you . you know , people are disgusted with the way that money has corrupted our political process , intimidating incumbents and empowering wall street every day , the turnstile government that we see , and also the power of the financial sector in both parties . they're looking for a leader who understands how the system works , who has not been coopted by it , and also has a proven record of accomplishing different things . i have a record of working across the political aisle . i've also spent more than half of my professional life away from politics in the independent world of being an author , a journalist , and a sole proprietor . in government service , i've fought and bled for our country in vietnam as a marine . i spent years as assistant secretary of defense , secretary of the navy in the reagan administration . in the senate , i spoke about economic fairness and social justice from day one . i also wrote and passed the best piece of veterans education legislation in history , the post 9 11 g . i . bill . i brought criminal justice reform out of the political shadows and into the national discussion . i led what later became called the strategic pivot to asia two years before president obama was elected . i know where my loyalties are . my mother grew up in the poverty of east arkansas chopping cotton , picking strawberries . three of her seven siblings died in childhood . my wife , hong , came to this country as a refugee from war torn vietnam learned english , a language that was not spoken at home , and earned her way into cornell law school . i have five daughters . amy works with disabled veterans , sarah is an emergency room nurse , julia is a massage therapist , emily and georgia are still in school . my son jim fought as an infantry marine on the bloody streets of ramadi . you may be sure that in a webb administration , the highest priority will be the working people who every day go out and make this country stronger at home , and who give us the right reputation and security overseas under a common sense foreign policy . cheering and applause 
clinton well , thank you . and i'm delighted to be here in new hampshire for this debate . you know , the american president has to both keep our families safe and make the economy grow in a way that helps everyone , not just those at the top . that's the job . i have a strategy to combat and defeat isis without getting us involved in another ground war , and i have plans to raise incomes and deal with a lot of the problems that keep families up at night . i'm very clear that we have a distinct difference between those of us on this stage tonight and all of our republican counterparts . from my perspective , we have to prevent the republicans from rolling back the progress that we've made . they would repeal the affordable care act , not improve it . they would give more tax breaks to the super wealthy and corporations , not to the middle class . and they would , despite all their tough talk about terrorism , continue to let people who are on the no fly list buy guns . so we have a lot of work to do in this campaign to make it clear where we stand in the democratic party , what we will do for our country , and i look forward to this evening's discussion of real issues that face the american people . thank you . 
o'malley yes , but i haven't gotten a penny this year . . . 
clinton . . . i'm getting to that . because i think if you only think about the coalition abroad you're missing the main point , which is we need a coalition here at home . guns , in and of themselves , in my opinion , will not make americans safer . we lose 33 , 000 people a year already to gun violence , arming more people to do what i think is not the appropriate response to terrorism . i think what is . . . is creating much deeper , closer relations and , yes , coalitions within our own country . the first line of defense against radicalization is in muslim american community . people who we should be welcoming and working with . i worry greatly that the rhetoric coming from the republicans , particularly donald trump , is sending a message to muslims here in the united states and literally around the world that there is a clash of civilizations , that there is some kind of western plot or even war against islam , which then i believe fans the flames of radicalization . so guns have to be looked at as its own problem , but we also have to figure out how we're going to deal with the radicalization here in the united states . crosstalk 
sanders no , i don't think i owe them an apology . they are in court today , and actually they won a preliminary decision today . they have the right to sue , and i support them and anyone else who wants the right to sue . 
sanders . . . i am absolutely supportive of comprehensive immigration reform and a path towards citizenship for 11 million people today who are living in the shadows . all right ? we got to do that . but you misswhen you looked at the issues , you missed two of the most important . and that is you're not going to accomplish what has to be done for working families and the middle class unless there is campaign finance reform . so long as big money interests control the united states congress , it is gonna be very hard to do what has to be done for working families . so let me be very clear . no nominee of mine , if i'm elected president , to the united states supreme court will get that nomination unless he or she is loud and clear , and says they will vote to overturn citizens united . second pointsecond point is that the only way we make change in terms of health care , in terms of dealing with a broken criminal justice system which , today , allows us to have more people in jail than any other countrylargely african american and latinothe only way we create millions of jobs by rebuilding our infrastructure or have a tax system that says to the wealthy that they are going to pay their fair share , is when millions of people become involved in the political process . no , you just can't negotiate with mitch mcconnell . mitch is gonna have to look out the window and see a whole lot of people saying , mitch , stop representing the billionaire class . start listening to working families . and as president , that's what i will work hard on . 
sanders . . . i'm still . . . 
sanders i am sure a lot of people are very surprised to learn that you supported raising the minimum wage to 15 bucks an hour . 
clinton well , i think that it had some positive aspects to it . and you mentioned some of them . the violence against women act , which has been a very important piece of legislation , in my opinion . and it also did some things which were to provide more opportunities for young people . so if we were to have the balance sheet on one side , there are some positive actions and changes . on the other side , there were decisions that were made that now we must revisit and we have to correct . i think that sentences got much too long . the original idea was not that we would increase sentences for non violent low level offenders , but once the federal government did what it did , states piled on . so we have a problem . and the very first speech i gave in this campaign was about what i will do to reform the criminal justice system and end the over mass incarceration . so i think that if all of us go and look back at where we were , senator sanders voted for the crime bill , and he says the same thing , there were some good things , and things that we have to change and learn from . so that's how i see it . and i think we ought to be putting our attention on forging a consensus to make the changes that will divert more people from the criminal justice system to start . 
clinton under the rules , i have been i have been invoked , david , so let me respond very quickly . number one . . . 
clinton well , the facts are that most of the guns that end up committing crimes in new york come from out of state . they come from the states that don't have kind of serious efforts to control guns that we do in new york . but let me say this in 1988 , as we've heard on every debate occasion , senator sanders did run for the congress and he lost . he came back in 1990 and he won , and during that campaign he made a commitment to the nra that he would be against waiting periods . and , in fact , in his own book , he talks about his 1990 campaign , and here's what he said . he clearly was helped by the nra , because they ran ads against his opponent . so , then he went to the congress , where he has been a largely very reliable supporter of the nra . voting he kept his word to the nra , he voted against the brady bill five times because it had waiting periods in it . thankfully , enough people finally voted for it to keep guns out of the hands of who should not have them . 
sanders set the record right . in 2006 when i ran for the senate , senator barack obama was kind enough to campaign for me , 2008 , i did my best to see that he was elected and in 2012 , i worked as hard as i could to see that he was reelected . he and i are friends . we've worked together on many issues . we have some differences of opinion . but here is the issue , secretary touched on it , can you really reform wall street when they are spending millions and millions of dollars on campaign contributions and when they are providing speaker fees to individuals ? so it's easy to say , well , i'm going to do this and do that , but i have doubts when people receive huge amounts of money from wall street . i am very proud , i do not have a super pac . i do not want wall street's money . i'll rely on the middle class and working families . . . 
sanders probably will . 
sanders hold . . . 
clinton i i said i made a mistake on iraq , and i would love to see senator sanders join with some of my colleague in addition the senate that i see in the audience . let's reverse the immunity . let's put the gun makers and sellers on notice that they're not going to get away with it . 
chafee i'd like to finish my question my answer . and also we just bombed a hospital . we've had drone strikes that hit civilian weddings . so i would change how we our approach to the middle east . we need a new paradigm in the middle east . 
sanders well , you know , when we began this campaign , i was 3 in the polls . i was probably 60 or 70 points behind the secretary . we have come a long way in 10 months . we have won . . . . . . including michigan last night , which some people , considered one of the major political upsets in modern american history . we have won nine state primaries and caucuses . and i believe that our message of the need for people to stand up and tell corporate america and wall street that they cannot have it all is resonating across this country . and i think in the coming weeks and months , we are going to continue to do extremely well , win a number of these primaries , and convince superdelegates that bernie sanders is the strongest candidate to defeat donald trump . 
sanders i don't think that anybody would suggest that israel invites and welcomes missiles flying into their country . that is not the issue . and , you evaded the answer . you evaded the question . the question is not does israel have a right to respond , nor does israel have a right to go after terrorists and destroy terrorism . that's not the debate . was their response disproportionate ? i believe that it was , you have not answered that . cheering 
o'malley my heart , like all of us in this room , john , and all the people across our country , my hearts go out to the people of france in this moment of loss . parents , and sons , and daughters and family members , and as our hearts go out to them and as our prayers go out to them , we must remember this , that this isn't the new face of conflict and warfare , not in the 20th century but the new face of conflict and warfare in the 21st century . and there is no nation on the planet better able to adapt to this change than our nation . we must able to work collaboratively with others . we must anticipate these threats before they happen . this is the new sort of challenge , the new sort of threat that does , in fact , require new thinking , fresh approaches and new leadership . as a former mayor and a former governor , there was never a single day , john , when i went to bed or woke up without realizing that this could happen in our own country . we have a lot of work to do , to better prepare our nation and to better lead this world into this new century . 
sanders let me . . . 
clinton he invoked mine as well . 
sanders let me just answer , i want to get back to this 2007 immigration bill . it's true , ted kennedy , a good friend of mine , and i think of the secretary's , did work very hard on that bill . but does anyone really believe that if that bill was all so good , as the secretary is touting , that lulac and other major latino organizations , the largest latino organizations in this country said no to that bill . and i worked very hard in improving the guest worker provisions so that in 2013 a bill i strongly supported , people who were in the guest worker program in america would not be treated like slaves . 
o'malley and you know , i actually know a great deal about this issue . and i have a dear friend , played music with him for years , remember when his when he came home with his baby girl , and now she's no longer with us , because of addiction and overdose . the last time in new hampshire , i had to take a break shortly after landing and call home and comfort a friend whose mother had died of an overdose . 
clinton it was a very close race . we've had some of those . i've won some . i've lost some . but , you know , i was very pleased by the overall outcome last night . and now we're on to the states for next tuesday and i'm looking forward to campaigning hard in all of them . 
sanders . . . campaign contributions . 
clinton well well , i'll tell you something else that senator sanders was against . he was against the auto bailout . in january of 2009 , president elect obama asked everybody in the congress to vote for the bailout . the money was there , and had to be released in order to save the american auto industry and four million jobs , and to begin the restructuring . we had the best year that the auto industry has had in a long time . i voted to save the auto industry . he voted against the money that ended up saving the auto industry . i think that is a pretty big difference . 
sanders as everybody you know , this is incredibly complicated and difficult issue and i applaud . i know president obama's been getting a lot of criticism on this . i think he is doing the right thing . what the nightmare is , which many of my republican colleagues appear to want is to not have learned the lesson of iraq . to get american young men and women involved in perpetual warfare in the quagmire of syria and the middle east would be an unmitigated disaster that as president , i will do everything in my power to avoid . 
sanders let me just let me just . . . 
clinton well , i'll start by saying amen to that . we are here in flint , i'm very grateful that my request that we hold this debate be held here so we can continue to shine a very bright spotlight on what has happened in this city . i agree , the governor should resign , or be recalled . . . . . . support the efforts of citizens attempting to achieve that . but , that is not enough . we have to focus on what must be done to help the people of flint . i support a hundred percent the efforts by your senators and members of congress to get the money from the federal government in order to begin the work that must occur to fix the infrastructure . the state should also be sending money immediately to help this city . applause and cheering i know the state of michigan has a rainy day fund for emergencies , what is more important than the health and wellbeing of the people , particularly children ? it is raining lead in flint , and the state is derelict in not coming forward with the money that is required . 
sanders with all with all due respect . . . i think it's fair to say that baltimore is not now one of the safest cities in america , but the issue is . . . 
o'malley john , i was the first person on this stage to say that we should accept the 65 , 000 syrian refugees that were fleeing the sort of murder of isil , and i believe that that needs to be done with proper screening . but accommodating 65 , 000 refugees in our country today , people of 320 million , is akin to making room for 6 . 5 more people in a baseball stadium with 32 , 000 . there are other ways to lead and to be a moral leader in this world , rather than at the opposite end of a drone strike . but i would want to agree with something that senator sanders says . the nature of warfare has changed . this is not a conflict where we send in the third divisions of marines . this is a new era of conflict where traditional ways of huge standing armies are not as serve our purposes as well as special ops , better intelligence and being more proactive . 
sanders let's begin , anderson , by understanding that bernie sanders has a d minus voting rating ph from the nra . let's also understand that back in 1988 when i first ran for the united states congress , way back then , i told the gun owners of the state of vermont and i told the people of the state of vermont , a state which has virtually no gun control , that i supported a ban on assault weapons . and over the years , i have strongly avoided instant background checks , doing away with this terrible gun show loophole . and i think we've got to move aggressively at the federal level in dealing with the straw man purchasers . also i believe , and i've fought for , to understand that there are thousands of people in this country today who are suicidal , who are homicidal , but can't get the healthcare that they need , the mental healthcare , because they don't have insurance or they're too poor . i believe that everybody in this country who has a mental crisis has got to get mental health counseling immediately . 
sanders well , i think we got one that's coming out tomorrow . 
clinton look . . . 
sanders well , let's begin by discussing the problem . as you've indicated , the american society of civil engineers say we need trillions of dollars trillions of dollars just to bring up our infrastructure to deal with water systems like flint , just to bring them up to decent levels . we have suggested a trillion dollar investment . now , you know how we're gonna pay for that ? i'll tell you how we're gonna pay for that . right now , this country is losing 100 billion every single year because profitable corporations are stashing their profits in the cayman islands , bermuda and in other tax havens . . . . . . and in some cases , not paying five cents in federal income tax . i will eliminate that outrageous loophole , and we will raise 1 trillion . and by the way , not only do we rebuild our crumbling infrastructure 1 trillion over five years creates 13 million decent paying jobs . 
sanders i don't think the term is what's important . what is important to understand is we have organizations , whether it is isis or al qaida , who do believe we should go back several thousand years . we should make women third class citizens , that we should allow children to be sexually assaulted , that they are a danger to modern society . and that this world , with american leadership , can and must come together to destroy them . we can do that . and it requires an entire world to come together , including in a very active way , the muslim nations . 
clinton well , i can't think of anything more of an outsider than electing the first woman president , but i'm not just running because i would be the first woman president . 
sanders why is it that we are why is it that we spend almost three times per capita as to what they spend in the u . k . , 50 percent more than what they pay in france , countries that guarantee health care to all of their people and in many cases , have better health care outcomes . bottom line . this ties into campaign finance reform . the insurance companies , the drug companies are bribing the united states congress . we need to pass a medicare for all single payer system . it will lower the cost of health care for a middle class family by thousands of dollars a year . 
sanders that is absolutely inaccurate . look , here is the reality , folks . there is one major country on earth that does not guarantee health care to all people . there is one major country the united states which ends up spending almost three times per capita what they do in the u . k . guaranteeing health care to all people , 50 percent more than they do in france guaranteeing health care to all people , far more than our canadian neighbors , who guarantee health care to all people . please do not tell me that in this country , if and here's the if we have the courage to take on the drug companies , and have the courage to take on the insurance companies , and the medical equipment suppliers , if we do that , yes , we can guarantee health care to all people in a much more cost effective way . 
o'malley john , please , it's personal privilege , john . 
sanders sure did . all right . first off , we can do all the great speeches we want but you're not going to succeed unless there is a consensus . in 1988 , just to set the record straight governor , i ran for the u . s . house . we have one house member from vermont , three candidates in the race . one candidate said , you know what , i don't think it's a great idea that we sell automatic weapons in this country that are used by the military to kill people very rapidly . gun people said , there were three candidates in the race , you vote for one of the others , but not bernie sanders . i lost that election by three percentage points . quite likely , for that reason . so please , do not explain to me , coming from a state where democratic governors and republican governors have supported virtually no gun control . crosstalk excuse me . do not tell me that i have not shown courage in standing up to the gun people , in voting to ban assault weapons , voting for instant background checks , voting to end the gun show loop hole and now we're in a position to create a consensus in america on gun safety . 
clinton . . . well , senator , no one wants to see that happen . i mean , look , i care deeply about this because just like you i have met so many people who had their life savings wiped out , who lost their homes , who are barely back with their heads above water . this was a disaster for our country , and we can never let that happen again . we have no disagreement about this . but , i think it's a broader target list than just wall street , and i believe that we have to be very focused on how we try to take back the power and increase the empowerment of the american people . and , i think i have that kind of experience , maybe because they've beat me up for so many years , and i know exactly how to handle them because i've been in the arena with them time and time again . 
clinton and . . . 
clinton well , i fully support social security . and the most important fight we're going to have is defending it against continuing republican efforts to privatize it . 
sanders yeah . 
o'malley 10 . 10 was all i could get the state to do by the time i left in my last year . but two of our counties actually went to 12 . 80 and their county executives , if they were here tonight , would also tell you that it works . the fact of the matter is , the more our people earn , the more money they spend , and the more our whole economy grows . that's american capitalism . 
clinton well , if i if i could . . . . . . to set the record straight , i voted against the only multinational trade agreement that came before me when i was in the senate . it was called cafta . i came out against the tpp after it was finished . i thought it was reasonable to actually know what was in it before i opposed it . i oppose it . now let me get back to what happened in january of 2009 . the bush administration negotiated the deal . were there things in it that i didn't like ? would i have done it differently ? absolutely . but was the auto bailout money in it the 350 billion that was needed to begin the restructuring of the auto industry ? yes , it was . so when i talk about senator sanders being a one issue candidate , i mean very clearly you have to make hard choices when you're in positions of responsibility . the two senators from michigan stood on the floor and said , we have to get this money released . i went with them , and i went with barack obama . you did not . if everybody had voted the way he did , i believe the auto industry would have collapsed , taking four million jobs with it . 
webb . . . giving a pathway to citizenship to those people who had come here , and put down their roots , and met as a series of standards . . . 
clinton no , i don't think so . i am advocating . . . 
sanders ok . let me suggest . . . crosstalk 
sanders wolf , thank you very much . cnn , thank you very much . secretary clinton , thank you very much . when we began this campaign almost a year ago , we started off at 3 percent in the polls . we were about 70 points behind secretary clinton . in the last couple of weeks , there were two polls out there that had us ahead . of the last nine caucuses and primaries , we have won eight of them , many of them by landslide victories . over the last year , we have received almost 7 million individual campaign contributions , averaging guess what 27 apiece , more individual campaign contributions than any candidate in american history at this point in a campaign . the reason that our campaign has done so well is because we're doing something very radical we're telling the american people the truth . and the truth is that this country is not going to move forward in a significant way for working people unless we overturn this disastrous citizens united supreme court decision . . . . . . and unless we have real campaign reform so that billionaires and super pacs cannot buy elections . this campaign is also determined to end a rigged economy where the rich get richer and everybody else get poorer , and create an economy that works for all of us , not just the 1 percent . thank you . 
sanders if i understand and you know , as i understand it , what you're really talking about is not what secretary clinton is responding to . as i understand it and maybe i'm wrong on this , but what you were essentially saying , and what people are saying , is that , if somebody who is crazy or a criminal or a horrible person goes around shooting people , the manufacturer of that gun should be held liable . and if that is your position , then what you are saying , essentially if that is the case , as i understand it it's not what secretary clinton is talking about . i agree with what she said . but if that is the case , then essentially , your position is there should not be any guns in america , period . crosstalk 
clinton it certainly does cover it . i would like to see it updated . 
sanders i don't think any i don't think any sensible person would disagree that the invasion of iraq led to the massive level of instability we are seeing right now . i think that was one of the worst foreign policy blunders in the more than history of the united states . 
sanders to suddenly announce now that you're for 15 , i don't think is quite accurate . 
clinton well , i think because throughout my public career i have been evening the odds for people in every way that i could . i started out with the children's defense fund , i worked throughout my time as a young lawyer as a person , an activist . certainly , in arkansas , then in the white house , to try to fix problems wherever i saw them . and , this problem is one that is particularly outrageous and painful at the same time . so , when i heard about it i immediately sent people here to find out what was going on . it was almost unbelievable . we have this problem in other places , but we don't say that it was actually caused by decisions made by public officials in positions of authority , as this one was . then , when i talked to the mayor i basically said , what can i do to help ? then , when i came here , and i met with some of the mothers , and met their children , and heard their stories i'm just determined to do whatever i can . so , i have put together resources from the private and philanthropic communities to help provide a bridge because you've got to get the federal money , you've got to get the state money , but i'm going to do everything i can . and , i will be with flint all the way through this crisis in whatever capacity i am . and , if i'm president , it will always be a priority for action from me . 
sanders well , secretary clinton , you're not in the white house yet . and let us be clear that every proposal that i have introduced has been paid for . for example , all right , who in america denies that we have an infrastructure that is crumbling ? roads , bridges , water systems , wastewater plants , who denies that ? who denies that real unemployment today , including those who have given up looking for work and are working part time is close to 10 percent ? who denies that african american youth unemployment , real , is over 50 percent . we need to create jobs . so yes , i will do away with the outrageous loopholes that allow profitable multinational corporations to stash billions of dollars in the cayman islands and bermuda and in a given year pay zero , zero in federal income tax . yes , i'm going to do away with that . we will use those proceeds , a hundred billion a year , to invest in rebuilding our infrastructure . yes , i believe that as a result of the illegal behavior on wall street , that they are a wall street that drove this country into the worst economic downturn since the great recession great depression . yes , i do believe that now after the american people bailed wall street out , yes , they should pay a wall street speculation tax so that we can make public colleges and universities tuition free . we bailed them out . now it is their time to help the middle class . 
clinton well , look , i've got to just jump in here because , honestly , senator sanders is the only person who i think would characterize me , a woman running to be the first woman president , as exemplifying the establishment . and i've got to tell you that it is . . . . . . it is really quite amusing to me . people support me because they know me . they know my life's work . they have worked with me and many have also worked with senator sanders . and at the end of the day they endorse me because they know i can get things done . i am not going to make promises i can't keep . i am not going to talk about big ideas like single payer and then not level with people about how much it will cost . a respected health economist said that these plans would cost a trillion dollars more a year . i'm not going to tell people that i will raise your incomes and not your taxes , and not mean it , because i don't want to see the kind of struggle that the middle class is going through exemplified by these promises that would raise taxes and make it much more difficult for many , many americans to get ahead and stay ahead . that is not my agenda . 
clinton you know , i am proud to have been endorsed by the aft and the nea , and i've had very good relationship with both unions , with their leadership . and we've really candid conversations because we are going to have to take a look at what do we need in the 21st century to really involve families , to help kids who have more problems than just academic problems ? a lot of what has happened and honestly it really pains me , a lot of people have blaming and scape goating teachers because they don't want to put the money into the schools system that deserve the support that comes from the government doing it's job . 
clinton along came george w . bush and trickle down economics and brought us the great recession , which thank goodness president obama has been digging us out of ever since . 
o'malley anderson , no president no commander in chief should take the military option off the table , even if most of us would agree that it should be the last option . what disturbed people so much about and i would agree with senator sanders on this leading us into iraq under false pretenses and telling us , as a people , that there were weapons of mass destruction there was was one of the worst blunders in modern american history . but the reason why people remain angry about it is because people feel like a lot of our legislators got railroaded in a war fever and by polls . and i remember being at a dinner shortly before that invasion . people were talking at and saying , it'll take us just a couple years to rebuild democracy , and i thought , has this world gone mad ? whenever we go and contrary to john quincy adams' advice searching the world for monsters to destroy , and when we use political might to take a at the expense of democratic principle , we hurt ourselves , and we hurt our inaudible . 
chafee i guess the coal lobby . i've worked hard for climate change and i want to work with the coal lobby . but in my time in the senate , tried to bring them to the table so that we could address carbon dioxide . i'm proud to be at odds with the coal lobby . 
o'malley andrea , when can i get my 30 seconds ? 
sanders you are not talking about me , are you ? laughter 
clinton i want to reverse citizens united . 
o'malley john , this is another one of those examples . like we have a we have a lot of work to do and we're the only nation on the planet that buries as many of our people from gun violence as we do . in my own state , after the children in that connecticut classroom were gunned down , we passed comprehensive gun safety legislation with background checks , ban on assault weapons , and senator , i think we do need to repeal that immunity that you granted to the gun industry . but secretary clinton , you've been on three sides of this . when you ran in 2000 , you said that we needed federal robust regulations . then , in 2008 , you were portraying yourself as annie oakley and saying that we don't need those regulations on the federal level and now you're coming back around here . so john , there's a big difference between leading by polls and leading with principle . we got it done in my state by leading with principal and that's what we need to do as a party for comprehensive gun safety . 
sanders i read secretary clinton's statement speech before aipac . i heard virtually no discussion at all about the needs of the palestinian people . almost none in that speech . so here is the issue of course israel has a right to defend itself , but long term there will never be peace in that region unless the united states plays a role , an even handed role trying to bring people together and recognizing the serious problems that exist among the palestinian people . that is what i believe the world wants to us do and that's the kind of leadership that we have got to exercise . 
sanders so let's say this . let's say this . 
sanders wait a minute . wait . could i finish ? you'll have your turn , all right ? but ultimately , if you look at our records , i stood up to corporate america time and time again . i went to mexico . i saw the lives of people who were working in american factories and making 0 . 25 an hour . i understood that these trade agreements were going to destroy the middle class of this country . i led the fight against us . that is one of the major differences that we have . 
sanders the answer is yes . we've got 11 million undocumented people in this country . i have talked to some of the young kids with tears rolling down their cheeks , are scared to death that today they may or their parents may be deported . i believe that we have got to pass comprehensive immigration reform , something that i strongly supported . i believe that we have got to move toward a path toward citizenship . i agree with president obama who used executive orders to protect families because the congress , the house was unable or refused to act . and in fact i would go further . what would motivate me and what would be the guiding light for me in terms of immigration reform , judy , is to bring families together , not divide them up . and let me say this also . somebody who is very fond of the president , agrees with him most of the time , i disagree with his recent deportation policies . and i would not support those . bottom line is a path towards citizenship for 11 million undocumented people , if congress doesn't do the right thing , we use the executive orders of the president . 
sanders well , thank you very much for not being resigned to that horrendous situation , but being prepared to stand up and fight back . . . 
clinton and we finally have a u . n . security council resolution bringing the world together to go after a political transition in syria . 
sanders the republican party , since i've been in the senate , and since president obama has been in office , has played a terrible , terrible role of being total obstructionists . every effort that he has made , that some of us have made , they have said no , no , no . now , in my view , the only way we can take on the right wing republicans who are , by the way , i hope will not continue to control the senate and the house when one of us elected president . . . . . . but the only way we can get things done is by having millions of people coming together . if we want free tuition at public colleges and universities , millions of young people are going to have to demand it , and give the republicans an offer they can't refuse . if we want to raise the minimum wage to 15 bucks an hour , workers are going to have to come together and look the republicans in the eye , and say , we know what's going on . you vote against us , you are out of your job . 
sanders wall street is a threat to the economy . they've got to be broken up . 
clinton well john , wait a minute . wait a minute , he has basically used his answer to impune my integrity . let's be frank here . 
clinton well , don't , let me say this , senator sanders voted for that bill , we both supported it . and , i think it's fair to say we did because back then there was an outcry over the rising crime rate , and people from all communities were asking that action be taken . now , my husband said at the naacp last summer that it solved some problems , but it created other problems , and i agree . and , one of those problems was , unfortunately , a move to expand the reasons why people would be incarcerated , not just at the federal level which is what this bill about , but in states and localities as well . and , that's why the very first speech that i gave in this campaign was about criminal justice reform , and ending the era of mass incarceration because i believe absolutely that too many families were broken up , too many communities were adversely affected . so , we've got to do a bunch of things . on the criminal justice side , look , we've got to have better policing . that means body cameras , that means ending profiling , that means doing everything we can to make sure there's respect between the community and the police . and , when it comes to incarceration . . . 
clinton well , i think senator sanders has just reinforced my point . yes , when i was secretary of state i did urge , along with the department of defense and the cia that we seek out , vet , and train , and arm syrian opposition figures so that they could defend themselves against assad . the president said no . now , that's how it works . people who work for the president make recommendations and then the president makes the decision . so i think it's only fair to look at where we are in syria today . and , yes , i do still support a no fly zone because i think we need to put in safe havens for those poor syrians who are fleeing both assad and isis and have some place that they can be safe . 
sanders . . . including a tax on carbon . something i don't believe secretary clinton supports . cheering and applause 
o'malley thank you . lester , on this stage tonight , this democratic stage , where we actually believe in science . laughter i would like to challenge and invite my colleagues here on this stage to join me in putting forward a plan to move us to a 100 percent clean , electric energy grid by 2050 . it can be done . with solar , with wind , with new technologies , with green buildings , this can happen , but in all president obama made us more energy independent , but in all of the above strategy didn't land us on the moon , we need american ingenuity and we need to reach by 2050 for the sake of our kids . 
sanders well , first of all , let's look at the facts . the facts that are very simple . republicans win when there is a low voter turnout , and that is what happened last november . sixty three percent of the american people didn't vote , anderson . eighty percent of young people didn't vote . we are bringing out huge turnouts , and creating excitement all over this country . democrats at the white house on down will win , when there is excitement and a large voter turnout , and that is what this campaign is doing . 
sanders david , thank you . 
o'malley instead of andrea , i think , instead of attacking one another on health care , we should be talking about the things that are actually working . in our state , we have moved to an all payer system . with the affordable care act , we now have moved all of our acute care hospitals , that driver of cost at the center , away from fee for service . and actually to pay , we pay them based on how well they keep patients out of the hospital . how well they keep their patients . that's the future . we need to build on the affordable care act , do the things that work , and reduce costs and increase access . crosstalk 
sanders white people ? 
sanders . . . can i have . . . crosstalk 
sanders he did he did break the law , and i think there should be a penalty to that . but i think what he did in educating us should be taken into consideration before he is inaudible . 
clinton and that's exactly what we are able to do based on the foundation of the affordable care act what governor o'malley just said is one of the models that we will be looking at to make sure we do get costs down , we do limit a lot of the unnecessary costs that we still have in the system . but , with all due respect , to start over again with a whole new debate is something that i think would set us back . the republicans just voted last week to repeal the affordable care act , and thank goodness , president obama vetoed it and saved obamacare for the american people . 
clinton i don't think we're at war with islam . i don't think we're at war with all muslims . i think we're at war with jihadists who have 
o'malley martha i would just repeat that 
o'malley it's just not true . 
chafee no , i would bring him home . the courts have ruled that what he did what he did was say the american . . . crosstalk 
clinton i negotiated the cease fire between israel and hamas in november of 2012 . i did it in concert with . . . president abbas of the palestinian authority based in ramallah , i did it with the then muslim brotherhood president , morsi , based in cairo , working closely with prime minister netanyahu and the israeli cabinet . i can tell you right now i have been there with israeli officials going back more than 25 years that they do not seek this kind of attacks . they do not invite the rockets raining down on their towns and villages . they do not believe that there should be a constant incitement by hamas aided and abetted by iran against israel . and , so when it came time after they had taken the incoming rockets , taken the assaults and ambushes on their soldiers and they called and told me , i was in cambodia , that they were getting ready to have to invade gaza again because they couldn't find anybody to talk to tell them to stop it , i flew all night , i got there , i negotiated that . so , i don't know how you run a country when you are under constant threat , terrorist tact , rockets coming at you . you have a right to defend yourself . that does not mean that does not mean that you don't take appropriate precautions . and , i understand that there's always second guessing anytime there is a war . it also does not mean that we should not continue to do everything we can to try to reach a two state solution , which would give the palestinians the rights and . . . 
sanders not good enough . here's the story . i mean , you know , let's not be naive about it . why do why , over her political career has wall street been a major the major campaign contributor to hillary clinton ? you know , maybe they're dumb and they don't know what they're going to get , but i don't think so . here is the major issue when we talk about wall street . it ain't complicated . you have six financial institutions today that have assets of 56 percent , equivalent to 56 percent of the gdp in america . they issue two thirds of the credit cards and one third of the mortgages . if teddy roosevelt , a good republican , were alive today , you know what he'd say ? break them up . reestablish glass steagall . and teddy roosevelt is right . that is the issue . now i am the only candidate up here that doesn't have a super pac . i am not asking wall street or the billionaires for money . i will break up these banks . support community banks and credit unions . that's the future of banking in america . 
clinton well , karen , first of all , i was proud a number of mayors from florida campaign for me in south carolina . i had a chance to talk to some of them about this issue . it is a really serious one . and there isn't much time left to do several things that i will move quickly to do . you can see already what's happening in miami , particularly in miami beach with tides rising . so we do have to invest in resilience and mitigation while we are trying to cut emissions and make up for the fact that this is clearly man made and man aggravated . and there are certain things that the president has done through executive action that i will absolutely support . all the republican say they will , if they're elected , heaven forbid , repeal all of those executive actions . i will maintain them and act on them . the clean power plan is something that senator sanders has said he would delay implementing , which makes absolutely no sense . we need to implement all of the president's executive actions and quickly move to make a bridge from coal to natural gas to clean energy . that is the way we will keep the lights on while we are transitioning to a clean energy future . and when i talk about resilience , i think that is an area we can get republican support on . crosstalk 
o'malley tried to mischaracterize it as free tuition for illegal immigrants . but , we took our case to the people when it was petitioned to referendum , and we won with 58 percent of the vote . the more our children learn , the more they will earn , and that's true of children who have yet to be naturalized . . . 
sanders the people aren't dumb . why in god's name does wall street . . . but let's not but let's not let's not insult let's not insult the intelligence of the american people . people aren't dumb . why in god's name does wall street make huge campaign contributions ? i guess just for the fun of it ; they want to throw money around . laughter why does the pharmaceutical industry make huge campaign contributions ? any connection maybe to the fact that our people pay the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs ? why does the fossil fuel industry pay spend huge amounts of money on campaign contributions ? any connection to the fact that not one republican candidate for president thinks and agrees with the scientific community that climate change is real and that we have got to transform our energy system ? and when we talk about wall street , let's talk about wall street . i voted for dodd frank , got an important amendment in it . in my view , it doesn't go anywhere near far enough . but when we talk about wall street , you have wall street and major banks have paid 200 billion in fines since the great crash . no wall street executive has been prosecuted . 
webb it's just it's gone back and forth over there . 
webb well , the the question really is how are we going to solve energy problems here and in the global environment if you really want to address climate change ? and when i was in the senate , i was an all of the above energy voter . we introduced legislation to bring in alternate energy as well as nuclear power . i'm a strong proponent of nuclear power . it is safe , it is clean . and really , we are not going to solve climate change simply with the laws here . we've done a good job in this country since 1970 . if you look at china and india , they're the greatest polluters in the world . fifteen out of the 20 most polluted cities in the world are in one of those two countries . we need to solve this in a global way . it's a global problem and i have been very strong on on doing that . the the agreements the so called agreements that we have had with china are illusory in terms of the immediate requirements of the of the chinese government itself . so let's solve this problem in an international way , and then we really will have a a way to address climate change . 
sanders so was i , john . let me get a chance to respond . this issue touches on two broad issues . it's not just wall street . it's campaign a corrupt campaign finance system . and it is easy to talk the talk about ending citizens united , but what i think we need to do is show by example that we are prepared to not rely on large corporations and wall street for campaign contributions , and that's what i'm doing . in terms of wall street , i respectfully disagree with you , madam secretary , in the sense that the issue here is when you have such incredible power and such incredible wealth . when you have wall street spending 5 billion over a 10 year period to get to get deregulated , the only answer they know is break them up , reestablish glass stegall . 
sanders well , the answer is , obviously , if you see suspicious activity , you report it . that's kind of a no brainer . you know , somebody is loading guns and ammunition into a house , i think it's a good idea to call 911 . do it . laughter 
clinton i will . 
sanders well , i if you are talking about the wall street bailout , where some of your friends destroyed this economy . . . 
sanders . . . let'slet'slet's talk about issues . 
o'malley well , that would be totally up to her . i mean , katie has never been a person who let her husband's professional choices get in the way of following her dreams . and i think she got that from her mother , actually . the and i readily admit that she is a far more accomplished lawyer than i was ever able to become , before i took my detour . she is a district court judge in maryland . she puts in a full day there . we've raised four terrific kids . and yet , when she was first lady of the state , not only would she go to work every day and sit there through a lot of sad and gut wrenching cases , but then she'd put in additional time being an advocate against domestic violence . maryland made great strides on that because of her advocacy , and her understanding of how the court process works . she was an advocate against bullying and implementing anti bullying things . so katie o'malley will do whatever katie o'malley wants to do , regardless of her husband's success in getting elected president . 
sanders now , this is getting to be fun . 
webb everybody makes their decisions when the time there is conscription . and as long as they go through the legal process that our country requires , i respect that . and it would be for the voters to decide whether senator sanders or anyone else should be president . i will say this , coming from the position that i've come from , from a military family , with my brother a marine , my son was a marine in iraq , i served as a marine , spending five years in the pentagon , i am comfortable that i am the most qualified person standing up here today to be your commander in chief . 
o'malley i'd like to offer a . . . 
o'malley but in all of that senator and secretary , i think we're leaving out something very important here . and that is that we still don't have the human intelligence overt , in terms of diplomatic intelligence or covert , to understand even what the heck happens as the secondary and tertiary effects of some of these things . we are walking through this region , andrea , without the human intelligence that we need . and we need to make a renewed investment as a country in bringing up a new generation of foreign service officers , and bringing up a new generation of business people and actually understanding and having relationships in these places . so we have a better sense of what the heck happens after a dictator topples and can take action to prevent another safe haven and another iteration of terror . 
sanders did i say that ? 
clinton now , let me say this . . . 
chafee but let me just say . . . 
sanders that's right , i mean , instead of arguing about definitions , let's talk about . . . 
sanders no , they wouldn't . look , here's where we are . let me reiterate . we have a global crisis . pope francis reminded us that we are on a suicide course . our legislation understands , errol , that there will be economic dislocation . it is absolutely true . there will be some people who lose their job . and we build into our legislation an enormous amount of money to protect those workers . it is not their fault that fossil fuels are destroying our climate . but we have got to stand up and say right now , as we would if we were attacked by some military force , we have got to move urgently and boldly . what does that mean ? 
clinton that is a pledge that i'm making . i made it when i ran in 2008 . 
sanders . . . no , no . . . 
sanders is that your strategy . . . 
sanders i suspect i would vote yes . and i would vote yes because i am seeing in this country too many lives being destroyed for non violent offenses . we have a criminal justice system that lets ceos on wall street walk away , and yet we are imprisoning or giving jail sentences to young people who are smoking marijuana . i think we have to think through this war on drugs . . . . . . which has done an enormous amount of damage . we need to rethink our criminal justice system , we we've got a lot of work to do in that area . 
o'malley anderson , look , this is the big banks i mean , once we repealed glass steagall back in the late 1999s ph , the big banks , the six of them , went from controlling , what , the equivalent of 15 percent of our gdp to now 65 percent of our gdp . and inaudible right before this debate , secretary clinton's campaign put out a lot of reversals on positions on keystone and many other things . but one of them that we still have a great difference on , madam secretary , is that you are not for glass steagall . you are not for putting a firewall between this speculative , risky shadow banking behavior . i am , and the people of our country need a president who's on their side , willing to protect the main street economy from recklessness on wall street . we have to fulfill . . . 
sanders . . . this is a good discussion here . 
sanders look , clearly , clearly , the secretary's words to wall street has really intimidated them , and that is why they have given her 15 million in campaign contributions . 
sanders and we are not going to win the white house based on just long term democratic votes . we have got to reach out to independents and i think i am well qualified to do that . 
clinton . . . that we'll go onto the general election with . 
sanders i was mayor for eight years , i did that as well . laughter 
clinton no . i think that , like most people that i know , i have a range of views , but they are rooted in my values and my experience . and i don't take a back seat to anyone when it comes to progressive experience and progressive commitment . you know , when i left law school , my first job was with the children's defense fund , and for all the years since , i have been focused on how we're going to un stack the deck , and how we're gonna make it possible for more people to have the experience i had . you know , to be able to come from a grandfather who was a factory worker , a father who was a small business person , and now asking the people of america to elect me president . 
clinton now , senator sanders voted against it . that's his perfect right to vote against it . but if everyone had voted as he voted . . . 
sanders great ideas , governor o'malley , secretary clinton , but here's the truth . if you have an administration stacked with wall street appointees , it ain't going to accomplish very much . so here's a promise that i make and i mentioned a moment ago how corrupt the system is goldman sachs , paying a 5 billion fine , gives this country , in recent history , a republican secretary of treasury , a democratic secretary of treasury . here's a promise . if elected president , goldman sachs is not going to have bring forth a secretary of treasury for a sanders administration . 
sanders i think what secretary clinton just said is absolutely right . i think i said it many months before she said it , but thanks for copying a very good idea . now the question though , you know , i have been criticized a lot for thinking big . you know , that's for believing that we can do great things as a nation . one of the things we should not be doing obviously , is punishing people for doing what we want them to do and that is to get an education . but here is the point . my program , making public colleges and universities tuition free , allowing people with debt to refinance at the lowest possible interest rates is a fairly expensive proposal , about 70 billion a year . you know how i'm going to pay for it ? i'm going to pay for it by imposing a tax on wall street speculation . we bailed out secretary clinton was one of those who voted to bail out wall street . now i think it's time for wall street to help the working families of this country . 
sanders well , first of all , let me applaud my good friend jim webb for his service to this country in so many ways . jim and i , under jim's leadership , as he indicated , passed the most significant veterans education bill in recent history . we followed suit with a few years later passing , under my leadership , the most significant veterans' health care legislation in the modern history of this country . when i was a young man i'm not a young man today . when i was a young man , i strongly opposed the war in vietnam . not the brave men like jim who fought in that war , but the policy which got us involved in that war . that was my view then . cheering and applause i am not a pacifist , anderson . i supported the war in afghanistan . i supported president clinton's effort to deal with ethnic cleansing in kosovo . i support air strikes in syria and what the president is trying to do . yes , i happen to believe from the bottom of my heart that war should be the last resort that we have got to exercise diplomacy . but yes , i am prepared to take this country into war if that is necessary . crosstalk 
sanders so , yes , we are going to pay for it . . . 
clinton . . . a growing epidemic . 
clinton well , all i can say is that given the terrible pressures that the auto industry was under and that the middle class of this state and ohio and indiana and illinois and wisconsin and missouri and other places in the midwest were facing , i think it was the right decision to heed what president elect obama asked us to do . he sent a letter , an authorized letter , asking us to support that to save the auto industry . yes , were there things in it that you and i would not have necessarily wanted ? that's true . but when it came down to it , you were either for saving the auto industry or you were against it . i voted to save the auto industry . and i am very glad that i did . 
clinton well , let me start by saying that the last time i checked as of last night , donald trump had received 3 . 6 million votes , which is a good number . and there is only one candidate in either party who has more votes than him and that's me . and , i am building a broad , diverse coalition across our country . i'm very excited by the support we're receiving . i have said , and i'll repeat here , i think that donald trump's bigotry , his bullying , his bluster , are not going to wear well on the american people . so , i will look forward to engaging him because , you know , i don't think we need to make america great again . america didn't stop being great , we have to make it whole again . we have to knock down the barriers , we have to end the divisiveness , we have to unify the country . and , if i'm fortunate enough to be the nominee that's exactly what i will do . 
clinton you know , on my very first visit to new hampshire in this campaign , i was in keene , and i was asked , what are you going to do about the heroin epidemic ? and all over new hampshire , i met grandmothers who are raising children because they lost the father or the mother to an overdose . i met young people who are desperately trying to get clean and have nowhere to go , because there are not enough facilities . so this is a major epidemic , and it has hit new hampshire and vermont particularly hard . i've had had two town halls , one in keene , one in laconia , dedicated exclusively to talking about what we can do . and i've heard some great ideas about how law enforcement is changing its behavior , how the recovery community is reaching out . and i was proud to get the endorsement of mayor walsh of boston , who has made his struggle with alcoholism a real clarion call for action in this arena . so , i've laid out a five point plan about what we can do together . i would like the federal government to offer 10 billion over ten years to work with states , and i really applaud governor hassan for taking up this challenge and working with the legislature here to come up with a plan . we need to do more on the prescribing end of it . there are too many opioids being prescribed , and that leads directly now to heroin addiction . and we need to change the way we do law enforcement , and of course , we need more programs and facilities , so when somebody is ready to get help , there's a place for them to go . and every law enforcement should carry the antidote to overdose , naloxone , so that they can save lives that are on the brink of expiring . 
sanders in all due respect . . . . . . in all due respect , secretary clinton , a lot of the progressive groups , the online groups have really asked you a simple question . are you coming onboard a proposal ? and what is that proposal ? now , the proposal that i have outlined , you know , should be familiar to you , because it is what essentially barack obama campaigned on in 2008 . you opposed him then . i would hope that you would come onboard and say that this is the simple and straightforward thing to do . we're asking the top 1 . 5 percent , including passive income , to start paying a little bit more so that the elderly and disabled vets in this country can live with security and dignity . i hope you will make a decision soon on this . 
clinton . . . you talk about corporate greed ? 
sanders no one is tearing this up , we're going to go forward . but with the secretary neglected to mention , not just the 29 million still have no health insurance , that even more are underinsured with huge copayments and deductibles . tell me why we are spending almost three times more than the british , who guarantee health care to all of their people ? fifty percent more than the french , more than the canadians . the vision from fdr and harry truman was health care for all people as a right in a cost effective way . we're not going to tear up the affordable care act . i helped write it . but we are going to move on top of that to a medicaid for all system . 
sanders yes , but here is the point , and obviously i will strongly support that nomination as a member of the senate . but , if elected president , i would ask the president to withdraw that nomination because i think i think this . i think that we need a supreme court justice who will make it crystal clear , and this nominee has not yet done that , crystal clear that he or she will vote to overturn citizens united and make sure that american democracy is not undermined . 
o'malley just 10 seconds . all of the things . . . 
sanders my plan is to make it work , to tell saudi arabia that instead of going to war in yemen , they , one of the wealthiest countries on earth , are going to have to go to war against isis . to tell qatar , that instead of spending 200 billion on the world cup , maybe they should pay attention to isis , which is at their doorstep . 
clinton you know , there is no doubt that the only people that i would ever appoint to the supreme court are people who believe that roe v . wade is settled law and citizens united needs to be overturned . and i want to say something about this since we're talking about the supreme court and what's at stake . we've had eight debates before , this is our ninth . we've not had one question about a woman's right to make her own decisions about reproductive health care , not one question . and in the meantime we have states , governors doing everything they can to restrict women's rights . we have a presidential candidate by the name of donald trump saying that women should be punished . and we are never asked about this . and to be complete in my concern , senator sanders says with respect to trump it was a distraction . i don't think it's a distraction . it goes to the heart of who we are as women , our rights , our autonomy , our ability to make our own decisions , and we need to be talking about that and defending planned parenthood from these outrageous attacks . 
sanders a brief response . 
clinton you know , i have said i have said many times , you know , i'm not asking people to support me because i'm a woman . i'm asking people to support me because i think i'm the most qualified , experienced , and ready person to be the president and the commander in chief . and i appreciate greatly senator sanders' voting record . and i was very proud to get the endorsement of the planned parenthood action fund , because i've been a leader on these issues . i have gone time and time again to take on the vested interests who would keep women's health care decisions the province of the government instead of women ourselves . i'm very proud that naral endorsed me because when it comes to it we need a leader on women's issues . somebody who , yes , votes right , but much more than that , leads the efforts to protect the hard fought gains that women have made , that , make no mistake about it , are under tremendous attack , not just by the republican presidential candidates but by a whole national effort to try to set back women's rights . so i'm asking women , i'm asking men , to support me because i'm ready to go into the white house on january 20th , 2017 and get to work on both domestic and foreign policy challenges . 
sanders yeah . 
clinton . . . with us in doing it . 
clinton you did support a u . n . security council approach , which we did follow up on . and , look , i think it's important to look at what the most important counterterrorism judgment of the first four years of the obama administration was , and that was the very difficult decision as to whether or not to advise the president to go after bin laden . i looked at the evidence . i looked at the intelligence . i got the briefings . i recommended that the president go forward . it was a hard choice . not all of his top national security advisors agreed with that . and at the end of the day , it was the president's decision . so he had to leave the situation room after hearing from the small group advising him and he had to make that decision . i'm proud that i gave him that advice . and i'm very grateful to the brave navy seals who carried out that mission . 
sanders all right , here is here is a real difference . this is a difference between understanding that we have a crisis of historical consequence here , and incrementalism and those little steps are not enough . not right now . not on climate change . now , the truth is , as secretary of state , secretary clinton actively supported fracking technology around the world . second of all , right now , we have got to tell the fossil fuel industry that their short term profits are not more important than the future of this planet . and that means and i would ask you to respond . are you in favor of a tax on carbon so that we can transit away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energy at the level and speed we need to do ? 
sanders but what . . . 
o'malley . . . so somebody please , go on to martinomalley . com . . . laughter . go on to martinomalley . com , send me your checks . they're not giving me zero . 
sanders . . . a little bit of time here please ? african american kids are unemployed or underemployed to the tune of 51 percent . that's why i co sponsored legislation to put 5 billion into a jobs program to put our kids to work because i would rather invest in education and jobs than jails and incarceration . we have got to raise the minimum wage to 15 an hour . the united states has got to join the rest of the industrialized world in guaranteeing health care to all people as a right . we need to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure . and when we do that , under my plan , we create 13 million decent paying jobs . 
sanders not being dependent on wall street , or big money , that is the future of the democratic party that i want to see . cheering and applause 
clinton that's fine . that's fine . laughter you know , i listen to a wide variety of voices that have expertise in various areas . i think it is fair to say , whatever the complaints that you want to make about him are , that with respect to china , one of the most challenging relationships we have , his opening up china and his ongoing relationships with the leaders of china is an incredibly useful relationship for the united states of america . so if we want to pick and choose and i certainly do people i listen to , people i don't listen to , people i listen to for certain areas , then i think we have to be fair and look at the entire world , because it's a big , complicated world out there . 
sanders well , the first difference is i don't take money from big banks . i don't get personal speaking fees from goldman sachs . what i would do . . . what i would do is understand that when you have three out of the four largest banks today , bigger than they were when we bailed them out because they were too big to fail , when you have the six largest financial institutions having assets of 60 percent of the gdp of america , it is very clear to me what you have to do . you've got to bring back the 21st century glass steagall legislation and you've got to break up these huge financial institutions . they have too much economic power and they have too much financial power over our entire economy . if teddy roosevelt were alive today , the old republican trust buster , what he would say is these guys are too powerful . break them up . i believe that's what the american people to want see . that's my view . 
clinton on january 20th , 2017 , the next president of the united states will walk into the white house . if , heaven forbid , that next president is a republican , i think it's pretty clear we know what will happen . a lot of the rights that have been won over years , from women's rights to voter rights to gay rights to worker rights , will be at risk . social security , which republicans call a ponzi scheme , may face privatization . our vets may see the v . a . hospital that needs to be improved and made better for them turned over to privatization . planned parenthood will be defunded . the list goes on because the differences are so stark . you know , everybody says every election's important , and there's truth to that . this is a watershed election . i know how important it is that we have a democrat succeed president obama in the white house . and i will do all that i can in this campaign to reach out and explain what i stand for and what i will do as president . you know , i became a grandmother 15 months ago , and so i spent a lot of time thinking about my granddaughter's future . but as president , i will spend even more time thinking about the futures of all the kids and the grandchildren in this country because i want to make sure every single child has a chance to live up to his or her god given potential . if you will join me in this campaign , we will make that a mission . thank you , good night and may the force be with you . 
webb i hope i can get that kind of time here . as a president of the united states , every life in this country matters . at the same time , i believe i can say to you , i have had a long history of working with the situation of african americans . we're talking about criminal justice reform , i risked my political life raising the issue of criminal justice reform when i ran for the senate in virginia in 2006 . i had democratic party political consultants telling me i was committing political suicide . we led that issue in the congress . we started a national debate on it . and it wasn't until then that the republican party started joining in . i also represented a so called war criminal , an african american marine who was wounded who was convicted of murder in vietnam , for six years . he took his life three years into this . i cleared his name after after three years . 
clinton you know , chuck , i've only had responsibility for voting for trade agreements as a senator . and i voted a multinational trade agreement when i was senator , the cafta agreement , because i did not believe it was in the best interests of the workers of america , of our incomes , and i opposed it . i did hope that the tpp , negotiated by this administration , would put to rest a lot of the concerns that many people have expressed about trade agreements . and i said that i was holding out that hope that it would be the kind of trade agreement that i was looking for . i waited until it had actually been negotiated because i did want to give the benefit of the doubt to the administration . once i saw what the outcome was , i opposed it . now i have a very clear view about this . we have to trade with the rest of the world . we are 5 percent of the world's population . we have to trade with the other 95 percent . and trade has to be reciprocal . that's the way the global economy works . but we have failed to provide the basic safety net support that american workers need in order to be able to compete and win in the global economy . so it's not just what's in the trade agreement that i'm interested in . i did help to renegotiate the trade agreement that we inherited from president bush with korea . we go the uaw on board because of changes we made . so there are changes that i believe would make a real difference if they could be achieved , but i do not currently support it as it is written . 
clinton well , first of all , i supported the president's moves . i helped to implement some of them leading up to the announcements when i was secretary of state , expanding travel opportunities , remittances . and i certainly told the president toward the end of my time that i hoped he would be able to move toward diplomatic relations and to make more of an impact by building up the relationship . and there are no better ambassadors for freedom , democracy and economic opportunity than cuban americans . so the more that we can have that kind of movement back and forth , the more likely we are to be able to move cuba toward greater freedom , greater respect for rights . you know , i'm looking forward to following the president's trip . i do think meeting with dissidents , meeting with people who have been voices , tribunes of freedom and opportunity is important . the cuban people deserve to have their human rights respected and upheld , they deserve to be able to move towards democracy where they pick their own leads . and i think both castros have to be considered authoritarian and dictatorial because they are not freely chosen by the people that are in cuba . i hope someday there will be leaders who are chosen by the cuban people , and i hope that democracy will be deeply rooted in cuban soil and that the people of cuba will have every opportunity to fulfill their own dreams in their own country . that is my hope . 
clinton i am 100 percent confident . this is a security review that was requested . it is being carried out . it will be resolved . but i have to add if there's going to be a security review about me , there's going to have to be security reviews about a lot of other people , including republican office holders , because we've got this absurd situation of retroactive classifications . honest to goodness , this isthis just beggars the imagination . so i have absolutely no concerns about it , but we've got to get to the bottom of what's really going on here , and i hope that will happen . 
clinton i want to be a president who takes care of the big problems and the problems that are affecting the people of our country everyday . 
sanders well , i agree , you know ? we can't sit up here i can't sit up here and make judgment over whether or not somebody committed a criminal act . but , i will tell you this that after an investigation , if people , in fact , were found to have committed a criminal act i talked to a mother . imagine this for a second , imagine a mother who had a bright seven year old gregarious girl doing well in school . two years later , that child is now in special education , intellectual capabilities significantly deteriorated . that is a crime against that child , and the people of flint . and , clearly , people are going to have to be held accountable . 
clinton i have a way to pay for it that actually makes the wealthiest pay for it . . . 
clinton senator , i have been i have been fighting for paid . . . 
sanders well , we've had a number of economists supporting our legislation . and here's where we are . the american people can judge . six largest financial institutions in america today have assets of roughly 10 trillion ; equivalent to 58 percent of the gdp of the united states of america . that is a lot of money . they issue two thirds of the credit cards , and by the way they're ripping off a whole lot of people with high interest rates on the credit cards , and they write about one third of the mortgages . that is a lot of power for six financial institutions . that's it . i think it is too much power . too much economic power , too much political power , and the economists that i talk to say we should break them up . 
clinton so i support dodd frank , but i have consistently said that's not enough . we've got to include the shadow banking sector . 
sanders i am on the committee that helped write the affordable care act . we have made some good progress . now what we have to take on is the pharmaceutical industry that is ripping off the american people every single day . i am proud that i was the first member of congress to take americans over the canadian border to buy breast cancer drugs for one tenth the price they were paying in the united states . but at the end of the day , no doubt , the affordable care act is a step forward . i think we all support it . i believe we've got to go further . i want to end the international embarrassment of the united states of america being the only major country on earth that doesn't guarantee health care to all people as a right , not a privilege . and also also , what we should be clear about is we end up spending and i think the secretary knows this far more per capita on health care than any other major country , and our outcomes , health care outcomes are not necessarily that good . 
clinton we've got the consensus , what we're lacking is political leadership . . . 
clinton no . but it is absolutely fair and necessary for americans to vet both of our proposals , to ask the really hard questions about , what is it we think we can accomplish , why do we believe that , and what would be the results for the average american family ? in my case , whether it's health care , or getting us to debt free tuition , or moving us toward paid family leave , i have been very specific about where i would raise the money , how much it would cost , and how i would move this agenda forward . i've tried to be as specific to answer questions so that my proposals can be vetted , because i feel like we have to level with people for the very reason , gwen , that you are mentioning . there is a great deal of skepticism about the federal government . i'm aware of that . it comes from the right , from the left , from people on all sides of the political spectrum . so we have a special obligation to make clear what we stand for , which is why i think we should not make promises we can't keep , because that will further , i think , alienate americans from understanding and believing we can together make some real changes in people's lives . 
o'malley there are so many issues that we haven't been able to discuss here . we have not fully discussed immigration reform , and the deplorable number of immigrant detention camps that our nation's now maintaining . we haven't discussed the shameful treatment that the people of puerto rico , our fellow americans , are getting treated with by these hedge funds that are working them over . we haven't discussed the fact that in our hemisphere we have the danger of nation state failures because of drug traffickers ; and honduras , and guatemala and el salvador . i guess the bottom line is this , look we are a great people the way we act at home and abroad based on the beliefs that unite us . our belief in the dignity of every person , our belief in our own common good . there is now challenge that is too great for us to overcome provided we bring forward in these divided times , new leadership that can heal our divides here at home and bring our principles into alignment abroad . we're on the threshold of a new era of american progress and i believe we have only need to join forces together and cross that threshold into a new era of american prosperity . 
sanders but if the . . . 
o'malley no , martha , i would not . and that's not what we did in maryland . but you know what we did in maryland ? we overcame the nra's objections . we overcame all of the crowds that were coming down there . we did our own rallies . and at least if we enact these laws in a prospective way , we can address a major vulnerability in our country . isil videos , isil training videos are telling lone wolves the easiest way to buy a combat assault weapon in america is at a gun show . and it's because of the flip flopping , political approach of washington that both of my two colleagues on this stage have represented there for the last forty years . 
clinton i just said that . he said at the naacp that there were some aspects that worked well . the violence against women provisions have worked well , for example . but , other aspects of it were a mistake and i agree . that's why i'm focused , and have a very comprehensive approach toward fixing the criminal justice system , going after systemic racism that stalks the criminal justice system , ending private prisons , ending the incarceration of low level offenders , and i am committed to doing that . 
clinton let me say this . i would give every person , but particularly children , due process to have their story told . and a lot of children will , of course , have very legitimate stories under our law to be able to stay . end video clip 
webb anderson , can i come into this discussion at some point ? 
sanders well , let me just say something . 
sanders well , i haven't quite run for president before . laughter and applause let's deal with some of the comments that secretary clinton made . and by the way , you know , sometimes there's a lot of drama here . i have known secretary clinton for 25 years and respect her very much . here is the issue . every major country on earth , whether it's the u . k . , whether it's france , whether it's canada , has managed to provide healthcare to all people as a right and they are spending significantly less per capita on health care than we are . so i do not accept the belief that the united states of america can't do that . i do not accept the belief that the united states of america and our government can't stand up to the ripoffs of the pharmaceutical industry which charge us by far the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs . number two , in the economy today , everybody understands that we need a well educated workforce . this is 2016 . when we talk about public education , it can no longer be k through 12th grade . i do believe that public colleges and universities should be tuition free . well , how do we pay for that ? it's an expensive proposition . i do believe that we should substantially lower student debt in this country , which is crushing millions of people . we pay for it , in my view , by a tax on wall street speculation . the middle class bailed out wall street in their time of need . now , it is wall street's time to help the middle class . 
clinton well , first of all , i'm absolutely against privatizing the v . a . and i am going do everything i can to build on the reforms that senator sanders and others in congress have passed to try to fix what's wrong with the v . a . there are a lot of issues about wait times and services that have to be fixed because our veterans deserve nothing but the best . but you're absolutely right , you know , rachel , this is another part of the koch brothers agenda . they've actually formed an organization to try to begin to convince americans we should no longer have guaranteed health care , specialized care for our veterans . i will fight that as hard as i can . i think there's where we can enlist the veterans service organizations , the veterans of america , because , yes , let's fix the v . a . , but we will never let it be privatized , and that is a promise . 
clinton well , i believe that the law that senator sanders voted for that i voted against , giving this special protection to gun manufacturers and to dealers , is an absolute abdication of responsibility on the part of those who voted for it . this is a this is a unique gift given to only one industry in the world by the united states congress , as senator murphy from connecticut said , we have tougher standards holding toy gun manufacturers and sellers to account than we do for real guns . and the point that senator sanders keeps making about how he wouldn't want a mom and pop store that was not the point of this . and if he can point to any , any incident where that happened , i would love to hear about it . what was really going on , i'll tell you , because it has a lot to do with new york city . new york city was on the brink of being able to hold manufacturers and dealers accountable through a very carefully crafted legal strategy . 
sanders oh , it was the crime bill . 
sanders clearly north korea is a very strange situation because it is such an isolated country run by a handful of dictators , or maybe just one , who seems to be somewhat paranoid . and , who had nuclear weapons . and , our goal there , in my view , is to work and lean strongly on china to put as much pressure . china is one of the few major countries in the world that has significant support for north korea , and i think we got to do everything we can to put pressure on china . i worry very much about an isolated , paranoid country with atomic bombs . i think , clearly , we got to work closely with china to resolve the serious problems we have , and i worry about putin and his military adventurism in the crimea and the ukraine . 
clinton mrs . kim , here is what i would do as president . number one , i would reinstate a program we did have during the 1990's where the federal government provided funding to repair and modernize public schools because a lot of communities can't afford to do that on their own . secondly , i would use every legal means at my disposal to try to force the governor and the state to return the schools to the people of detroit to end the emergency management . . . applause and cheering . . . which , i believe , if you look at the data , the situation has only gotten worse with these emergency managers that have put the system further in debt . number three , i want to set up inside the department of education , for want of a better term , kind of an education swat team , if you will . where we've got qualified people , teachers , principals , maybe folks who are retired , maybe folks who are active , but all of whom are willing to come and help . when detroit gets back their schools , they should have all the help they can get to be able to get teachers in the classroom , to be able to find spaces while schools are being repaired . and , i also would look at how we could through the federal government support more teachers because we're going to have a teacher shortage in some of the hardest to teach districts . . . 
bush don't cut me off . 
cruz common core is a disaster . and if i am elected president , in the first days as president , i will direct the department of education that common core ends that day . now , let me tell you why you can do that , because it's easy to talk about the problem , but you have to understand the solutions . the obama administration has abused executive power in forcing common core on the states . it has used race to the top funds to effectively blackmail and force the states to adopt common core . now , the one silver lining of obama abusing executive power is that everything done with executive power can be undone with executive power , and i intend to do that . beyond that , though , jake , i intend to work to abolish the federal department of education and send education back to the states and back to the local governments . and let me say finally , the most important reform we can do in education after getting the federal government out of it , is expand school choice ; expand charter schools and home schools and private schools and vouchers , and scholarships . and give every child african american , hispanic every child in need an opportunity to access to a quality education . 
bush right . 
cruz eighty years of not confirming . for example , l . b . j . nominated abe fortas . fortas did not get confirmed . he was defeated . 
trump i watched i watched . . . . . . the lobbyists . i watched what this man did to dr . ben carson , who i respect , in iowa , where he said that ben carson is out of the race he has left iowa and he's out of the race . and i thought it was disgraceful . and got a lot of votes because of that a lot of votes . took them away from ben carson . i watched that . probably took them away from me , too . but i watched it . i also watched where he did a forum that looked like it came right out of a government agency , and it said on top , voter violation , and then it graded you . . . bell ringing . . . and it scared the hell out of people , and it said the only way you clear up the violation , essentially , is to go and vote for ted cruz . i watched that fraudulent document , and i said it's the worst thing i've ever seen in politics . bell ringing to me , that was even worse than what he did to ben . 
christie be honest , ben , be honest . 
trump first of all , he was in charge of amnesty , he was the leader , and you can ask marco because they've been debating this every debate that we've had . as far as coming back in , number one , you wouldn't even be talking , and you wouldn't have asked that as the first question if it weren't for me when my opening when i talked about illegals immigration . it wouldn't even be a big subject . but , we either have a country , or we don't have a country . we have at least 11 million people in this country that came in illegally . they will go out . they will come back some will come back , the best , through a process . they have to come back legally . they have to come back through a process , and it may not be a very quick process , but i think that's very fair , and very fine . they're going to get in line with other people . the best of them will come back , but they're going to come back through a process . 
rubio and to have a president forcing the israelis to the table is harmful to the israeli and emboldens israel's enemies . 
rubio i speak fast . laughter 
rubio . . . it's your record , it's not a talking point . . . 
trump why do you lie ? 
kasich let's start off with my father being a mailman . so i understand the concerns of all the folks across this country , some of whom have trouble , you know , making ends meet . but i think she will come in a narrow way . the nominee of this party , if they're going to win , has got to come at it in a big way , which is pro growth . which is balancing budgets . you know , we were talking about it . people were saying , could we do it ? i was the chairman of the budget committee and the lead architect the last time it happened in washington , and when we did it we had great economic growth , we cut taxes , and we had a big surplus . economic growth is the key . economic growth is the key to everything . but once you have economic growth , it is important that we reach out to people who live in the shadows , the people who don't seem to ever think that they get a fair deal . and that includes people in our minority community ; that includes people who feel as though they don't have a chance to move up . you know , america is a miracle country . and we have to restore the sense that the amiracle will apply to you . each and every one of the people in this country who's watching tonight , lift everybody , timer sounds unite everybody and build a stronger united states of america again . it will be and can be done . 
fiorina we have been talking about it for 25 years . this is why people are tired of politicians . 
paul the question always is , what works better , the private marketplace or government ? and what distributes goods better ? it always seems to be the private marketplace does a better job . is there an area for a safety net ? can you have medicare or social security ? yes . but you ought to acknowledge the government doesn't do a very good job at it . the main problem with medicare right now is that the average person pays in taxes over their whole lifetime about 100 , 000 . but the average person takes out about 350 , 000 . we have this enormous mismatch because we have smaller and smaller families . when people ask me , whose fault is it ? whose fault is it that medicare is broken , out of money , that social security is broken , out of money ? and i say , look , it's not republicans' fault , it's not democrats' fault , it's your grandparents' fault for having too many damn kids . laughter after the war we had all of these kids , baby boomers . now we're having smaller families . we used to have 16 workers for one retiree , now you have three workers for one retiree . it's not working . i have a bill to fix medicare . i've a bill to fix social security . for both of them you have to gradually raise the age . if you're not willing to do that , nobody wants to do it , but if you're not willing to gradually raise the age , you're not serious about fixing either one of them . 
bush no , not at all , absolutely not . i can see why people are angry and scared , because this president has created a condition where our national security has weakened dramatically . i totally get that . but we're running for the presidency of the united states here . this isn't this isn't , you know , a different kind of job . you have to lead . you cannot make rash statements and expect the rest of the world to respond as though , well , it's just politics . every time we send signals like this , we send a signal of weakness , not strength . and so it was inaudible his statement , which is why i'm asking him to consider changing his views . 
trump yes . 
rubio he is and so are those that voted for it . there were some that voted for it because they wanted to keep it alive and they were afraid the whole program would expire . here's the world we live in . this is a radical jihadist group that is increasingly sophisticated in its ability , for example , to radicalize american citizens , in its inability to exploit loopholes in our legal immigration system , in its ability to capture and hold territory in the middle east , as i outlined earlier , in multiple countries . this is not just the most capable , it is the most sophisticated terror threat we have ever faced . we are now at a time when we need more tools , not less tools . and that took we lost , the metadata program , was a valuable tool that we no longer have at our disposal . 
kasich . . . and we're going to have to work our way out of it , including . . . 
christie john i'm not done yet , john . 
trump i would have gotten it . 
christie excuse me . . . 
trump well , then , if i can't if hey , if i can't beat her , you're really going to get killed , aren't you ? so so let me ask you this , because you're really getting beaten badly . i know you're embarrassed i know you're embarrassed , but keep fighting keep swinging , man . swing for the fences . let me just tell you let me just tell you , the trump university case is a civil case . not a it's a civil case . it's a case where people want to try and get it's a case that is nonsense . it's something i could have settled many times . i could settle it right now for very little money , but i don't want to do it out of principle . the people that took the course all signed most many many signed report cards saying it was fantastic , it was wonderful , it was beautiful . as and believe me , i'll win that case . that's an easy case . civil case . number two , as far as the taxes are concerned , i'm being audited . it's a very routine audit , and it's very unfair , because i've been audited for , i think , over 12 years . every year , because of the size of my company , which is very , very large , i'm being audited which is a very large company . bell ringing 
kasich well , first of all , let's not you know , math doesn't tell the whole story in politics . the great thing about politics , the reason why we watch it is because what's true today is not necessarily true tomorrow . so let's not get ahead of ourselves . secondly , look , when you went to school up there in salem , ohio , ok . if you got an 86 , you got a b . because everybody else had an 84 didn't mean you got an a . so you just have to win enough delegates to be the nominee . and frankly , i don't know if we're going to get a convention like that . but if we do , i was at one in 1976 as a wee lad and supported ronald reagan and actually worked directly with him . he tried valiantly . he lost . gerald ford won . the party was united . gerald ford served the country great by pardoning richard nixon . he lost the election probably because of that , but he put america first . and we were healed as a party . so , look , you have to earn the delegates in order to be picked . but let's not get ahead of ourselves . we don't know what's going to happen because we still have about half the delegates to be selected . and that's what's going to be a very interesting thing to see how it all turns out as we move forward over the next couple of weeks . 
cruz and i would point out , harry reid and chuck schumer are both democrats that mr . trump has written checks to repeatedly . any justice that those two sign off on is going to be a left wing judicial activist who will undermine religious liberty , and we are one vote away from the heller decision being overturned , which would effectively erase the second amendment from the bill of rights . if you care about the second amendment , then you need to ask who on this stage do you know will appoint principled constitutionalists to the court and not cut a deal with your second amendment rights ? 
kasich sure . we would move the medicare system from a 7 percent growth down to about a 5 percent growth . and i have a whole series of ways to do that . in ohio , we reduced medicaid funding for the poor from 10 percent to 2 . 5 percent , didn't cut one benefit or didn't take anybody off the rolls . why ? because we're innovators . i've been an innovator my entire career . and i really don't care what special interests or lobbyists have to say . i have a job to do when i take over a public office . now , we freeze non defense discretionary for eight years . we also put an increase in defense spending . our tax cuts balance out . and at the end of the day , we will get to a balanced budget . and i want everybody here to know , when i was budget committee chairman in washington , i stepped on every toe in that town , and we got to a balanced budget , and we had enormous job growth . and as governor of ohio , we went from 350 , 000 lost jobs to a gain of 347 , 000 jobs . 
bush . . . because of what president obama's done by pulling back . 
cruz . . . on larry tribe . let me tell you who larry tribe is . he's a left wing judicial activist , harvard law professor who was al gore's lawyer in bush versus gore . he's a major hillary clinton supporter . and there's a reason why hillary's supporters are echoing donald's attacks on me , because hillary . . . 
carson and i have a lot more to say about it . 
trump i don't think he's suggesting that at all . 
bush . . . the simple fact is i've also laid out my plans on inaudible immigration . . . 
bush i totally agree that we need to give veterans more choices . a veterans card to be able to go to a private provider will enhance the quality of the service inside the department of veterans affairs . we need career civil service reform . only three people were fired after waiting lists were dropped where veterans didn't get care and people died . it is outrageous . and hillary clinton says that that's acceptable ? because she is captive of the public service uniforms . career civil service reform would allow the next president to fire people that are that are showing sheer incompetence . at a town hall meeting today , someone came told a story of their father who looked like he was 85 . he had he got a bill eight years later from an operation he had , eight years it took . they couldn't resolve the dispute and then he was told that he died . literally , the veterans administration sent a death certificate to this guy and it took nine months to clarify the guy i met him . he's voting for me . and he is likely to be alive . laughter this is this is outrageous . it is completely outrageous . so , giving veterans more choices , creating centers of excellence , focusing on the true problems that exist . dr . carson is completely right . we need to start focusing on this earlier , before they become veterans so that there's a customized plan so people don't fall through the cracks . we can do this , but it's going to require someone who has proven leadership skills to make it happen . 
christie well , maria , i'm glad to have heard from you in the summary of that question about what's going on in the world . because tuesday night , i watched story time with barack obama . and i've got to tell you , it sounded like everything in the world was going amazing , you know ? the fact is , there's a number of things that the next president is going to have to do to clean up this mess . the first thing is we have to strengthen our alliances around the world . and the best way to do that is to start talking to our allies again and having them be able to count on our word . lots of people will say lots of different things about me in this campaign and others , but the one thing they've never said about me is that i'm misunderstood . and so when we talk to our allies and we give them our word , in a christie administration , they know we're going to keep it . next , we have to talk to our adversaries , and we have to make sure they understand the limits of our patience . and this president , given what ted said right at the beginning , he's absolutely right . it's a it's absolutely disgraceful that secretary kerry and others said in their response to what's going on in iran that this was a good thing ; it showed how the relationship was getting better . the president doesn't understand and by the way , neither does secretary clinton and here's my warning to everybody out in the audience tonight . if you're worried about the world being on fire , you're worried about how we're going to use our military , you're worried about strengthening our military and you're worried most of all about keeping your homes and your families safe and secure , you cannot give hillary clinton a third term of barack obama's leadership . i will not do that . if i'm the nominee , she won't get within 10 miles of the white house . 
trump i agree 100 percent , by the way , with carly on the fact that the democrats do not want to solve this problem , for the obvious reasons , but they do not . but i believe that a reading of the 14th amendment allows you to have an interpretation where this is not legal and where it can't be done . i've seen both sides , but some of the greatest scholars agree with me , without having to go through congress . if you do go through congress , you can absolutely solve the problem . 
trump no , i don't . no , i don't . 
fiorina i hope at some point you're going to ask me my strategy . 
cruz i will say , it is fairly remarkable to see donald defending ben after he called , pathological , and compared him to a child molester . both of which were offensive and wrong . but let me say this you notice donald didn't disagree with the substance that he supports taxpayer funding for planned parenthood . and donald has this weird pattern , when you point to his own record , he screams , liar , liar , liar . you want to go . . . 
christie you bet they do . and if i were the prosecutor , that is exactly where they would be . the fact is that this justice department under this president has been a political justice department . it has been a justice department that decided that they want to pick who the winners and losers are . they like general motors , so they give them a pass . they don't like somebody else like david petraeus , they prosecute them and send a decorated general on to disgrace . it's a political justice department . and , jim , you know full well that in the seven years i was u . s . attorney we went after pharmaceutical companies . we went after companies that were ripping off shareholders . we went after companies that were doing things that were against the law . and to expand on mr . carson's or dr . carson's question , let's face it , we have laws already . we don't need newer ph laws . we don't need hillary clinton's price controls for again , does anybody out there think that giving washington , d . c . , the opportunity to run the pharmaceutical industry is a good idea , given how well they have done running the government ? so what we do , though , is , if there is somebody who is price gouging , we have laws for prosecutors to take that on . let's let a justice department and i will make an attorney general who will enforce the law and make justice more than just a word . it will be a way of life . 
paul liberty thrives when government is small . i want a government so small i can barely see it . i want a government so small that the individual has a chance to thrive and prosper . i think , though , government is too big now . and what you're going to see in washington this week is establishment republicans have made an agreement with the president to raise the debt ceiling in an unlimited fashion ; no limit to the debt ceiling raise . this is extraordinary . it's extraordinarily wrong . you'll see me on the floor of the senate tomorrow filibustering this and saying enough is enough , no more debt . 
cruz it's kind of an issue i have a long history with . 
trump your brother and your brother's administration gave us barack obama , because it was such a disaster , those last three months , that abraham lincoln couldn't have been elected . 
bush when he and he when he asked when he asked florida to have casino gambling , we said no . 
cruz you want me to answer that question ? i'm happy to answer the question . . . crosstalk 
paul i kind of have to laugh when i think of , mmm , sounds like a non sequitur . he was asked whether or not he would be capable and it would be in good hands to be in charge of the nuclear weapons , and all of a sudden , there's a sideways attack at me . i think that really goes to really the judgment . do we want someone with that kind of character , that kind of careless language to be negotiating with putin ? do we want someone like that to be negotiating with iran ? i think really there's a sophomoric quality that is entertaining about mr . trump , but i am worried . i'm very concerned about him having him in charge of the nuclear weapons , because i think his response , his his visceral response to attack people on their appearance short , tall , fat , ugly my goodness , that happened in junior high . are we not way above that ? would we not all be worried to have someone like that in charge of the nuclear arsenal ? 
trump we have no idea who they are . 
rubio . . . a third of the people inaudible . . . 
huckabee i don't think it's so much about when the government orders a corporation to do something . in fact , that's part of the problem . if you saw that blimp that got cut loose from maryland today , it's a perfect example of government . i mean , what we had was something the government made basically a bag of gas that cut loose , destroyed everything in its path , left thousands of people powerless , but they couldn't get rid of it because we had too much money invested in it , so we had to keep it . that is our government today . we saw it in the blimp . that's exactly what we saw . so look , corporations ought to exercise some responsibility . when ceo income has risen 90 percent above the average worker , when the bottom 90 percent of this country's economy has had stagnant wages for the past 40 years , somebody is taking it in the teeth . and it's not the folks on wall street . i'm not anti wall street , but i don't believe the government ought to wear a team jersey , pick winners and losers . 
trump ok . so i will say this , though , hugh was giving me name after name , arab name , arab name , and there are few people anywhere , anywhere that would have known those names . i think he was reading them off a sheet . and frankly i will have and i told him , i will have the finest team that anybody has put together and we will solve a lot of problems . you know , right now they know a lot and look at what is happening . the world is blowing up around us . we will have great teams and great people . 
trump well , look , you know , when a family flies into the world trade center , a man flies into the world trade center , and his family gets sent back to where they were going and i think most of you know where they went and , by the way , it wasn't iraq but they went back to a certain territory , they knew what was happening . the wife knew exactly what was happening . they left two days early , with respect to the world trade center , and they went back to where they went , and they watched their husband on television flying into the world trade center , flying into the pentagon , and probably trying to fly into the white house , except we had some very , very brave souls on that third plane . all right ? 
walker to be clear , what i said the other day was that we need to lift the political restrictions that are already in play . barack obama's administration has put political restrictions on the military personnel already in iraq . we need to lift those and then we need to listen to our military experts , not the political forces in the white house , but our military experts about how many more we sent in . and we certainly shouldn't have a commander in chief who sends a message to our adversaries as to how far we're going to go , and how far we're willing to fight , so i'm not putting a troop number . what i'm saying is lift the political restrictions . when you do that , you empower our military personnel already there to work with the kurd and the sunni allies , to reclaim the territory taken by isis . and to do so in a way that allows that isis doesn't go back in syria , as we were just talking about here . that is the fundamental problem going forward . we have a president and hillary clinton was a part of this , by the way , who has made political decisions for our men and women in uniform . i want the men and women at home to know , if i'm commander in chief , i will only send you into harm's way when our national security is at risk . and if we do , you know you'll have our full support , the support of the american people , and you'll have a clear path for victory . 
bush when you head back to airport tonight , go check and see what the . . . 
kasich and i will have done it within 100 days , and it will pass . and we will be strong again . thank you . 
carson in the two hours of this of this debate , five people have died from drug related deaths , 100 million has been added to our national debt , 200 babies have been killed by abortionists , and two veterans have taken their lives out of despair . this is a narrative that we can change , not we the democrats , not we the republicans , but we the people of america , because there is something special about this nation , and we must embrace it and be proud of it and never give it away for the sake of political correctness . 
trump that was licensing . 
christie i don't think senator rubio is a skeptic of climate change . i think what senator rubio said i agree with . that in fact we don't need this massive government intervention to deal with the problem . look at what we have done in new jersey . we have already reached our clean air goals for 2020 . and when i was governor , i pulled out of the regional cap and trade deal , the only state in the northeast that did that . and we still reached our goals . why ? because 53 percent of our electricity comes from nuclear . we use natural gas . we use solar power . we're the third highest using solar power state . you know why ? because we made all of those things economically feasible . i agree with marco . we shouldn't be destroying our economy in order to chase some wild left wing idea that somehow us by ourselves is going to fix the climate . we can contribute to that and be economically sound . we have proven we can do that in new jersey . nuclear needs to be back on the table in a significant way in this country if we want to go after this problem . 
rubio wolf , no . i want to clarify something . 
fiorina the people are fed up with the political class . 
huckabee i have no idea . crosstalk 
cruz well , but let me explain , the focus should be . . . 
rubio . . . have been interviewed . . . 
trump it's a private job . 
carson 
huckabee well , let's all be reminded , 60 million americans are on social security , 60 million . a third of those people depend on 90 of their income from social security . nobody in this country is on social security because they made the decision when they were starting work at 14 that they wanted to trust some of their money with the government . the government took it out of their check whether they wanted them to or not . and , if person goes to 65 , they're going to spend 51 years with the government reaching into their pocket at every paycheck . now , here's the point , whose fault is it that the system is screwed up ? is it the recipients , or is it the government ? and , if congress wants to mess with the retirement program , why don't we let them start by changing their retirement program , and not have one , instead of talking about getting rid of social security and medicare that was robbed 700 billion dollars to pay for obamacare . it's always that the government figures that they can do this off the backs of people , many of whom are poor , and depend on that money , and i just think it's fundamentally lying to the people and stealing from them , and we shouldn't be doing it . 
cruz you know , what we're seeing with donald is actually the pattern of washington the pattern of washington deal makers , which is they make promises , they break their words , and then when anyone calls them on it , they call you a liar . and so that's donald's pattern over and over again . he said , for example , seven months ago this is donald speaking , quote i , donald trump , was a member of the establishment . there's a reason harry reid thinks he's the best republican up here . there's a reason jimmy carter said he would support donald trump over me , because he said donald trump is malleable , he has no fixed set of beliefs . . . bell ringing . . . whereas ted cruz is not malleable . and every time anyone points at donald's actual record . . . 
rubio let me let me answer your question on the sun sentinel editorial today . back in 2004 , one of my predecessors to the senate by the name of bob graham , a democrat , ran for president missing over 30 percent of his votes . i don't recall them calling for his resignation 
bush and you lost in the court . 
trump then you have to get rid of larry kudlow , who sits on your panel , who's a great guy , who came out the other day and said , i love trump's tax plan . crosstalk 
trump he said very good things about me , and i said . . . crosstalk 
cruz and carl carl , i'm not finished yet . the contrast with the democratic debate , where every fawning question from the media was , which of you is more handsome and why ? laughter and let me be clear . crosstalk 
trump . . . and , it was almost done not now . . . 
bush during and after . and that's not i'm not going to be bought by anybody . 
trump i was excuse me , jeb . 
trump give me a break . 
trump i have nothing to say . i mean , generally speaking , agree with what he said . i would have certainly have rather left it to the states . i was always in favor i was very surprised when they came up with that decision . i would have certainly i would have preferred had it been left to the states and i think most people would have preferred that . 
paul he's referred to me . 
bush . . . let me finish . . . 
trump i think assad is a bad guy , a very bad guy , all right ? lots of people killed . i think we are backing people we have no idea who they are . the rebels , we call them the rebels , the patriotic rebels . we have no idea . a lot of people think , hugh , that they are isis . we have to do one thing at a time . we can't be fighting isis and fighting assad . assad is fighting isis . he is fighting isis . russia is fighting now isis . and iran is fighting isis . we have to do one thing at a time . we can't go and i watched lindsey graham , he said , i have been here for 10 years fighting . well , he will be there with that thinking for another 50 years . he won't be able to solve the problem . we have to get rid of isis first . after we get rid of isis , we'll start thinking about it . but we can't be fighting assad . and when you're fighting assad , you are fighting russia , you're fighting you're fighting a lot of different groups . but we can't be fighting everybody at one time . 
cruz but you just said an executive . . . 
carson all right . well , first of all , you know , so many people have said to me , you need to scream and jump and down jump up and down like everybody else . is that really what you want ? what we just saw ? i don't think so . and you know , i when i got into this race , i decided to look under the hood of the engine of what runs washington , d . c . , and my first inclination was to run away , but i didn't do it because i'm thinking about our children and the fact that we are the united states of america . and anybody up here is going to be much better than what's going to come on the other side . and what happened tonight with with justice scalia tells you that we cannot afford to lose this election , and we cannot be tearing each other down . 
trump they have used the laws of the land , which is the crosstalk 
trump or somebody else . right . 
rubio well , first of all , i don't believe that believing in traditional marriage the way i do makes you a bigot or a hater . it means that you believe that this institution that's been around for millenial is an important cornerstone of society . i respect people that believe differently . but i believe deeply , that marriage should be between one man and one woman . on the issue of life , to me , the issue of life is not a political issue . it's a human rights issue and it's a difficult issue , because it puts in conflict two competing rights . on the one hand is the right of a woman to choose what to do with her body which is a real right . and on the other hand is the right of an unborn human child to live . and they're in conflict . and as a policy maker , i must choose which one of these two sides takes precedence . and i have chosen to err on the side of life . here's what i find outrageous . there has been five democratic debates . the media has not asked them a single question on abortion and on abortion , the democrats are extremists . why doesn't the media ask hillary clinton why she believes that all abortion should be legal , even on the due date of that unborn child . why don't they ask hillary clinton why she believe that partial birth abortion , which is a gruesome procedure that has been outlawed in this country , she thinks that's a fundamental right . they are the extremists . . . bell rings . . . when it comes to the issue of abortion and i can't wait to expose them in a general election . 
rubio i'll support donald if he's the republican nominee , and let me tell you why . because the democrats have two people left in the race . one of them is a socialist . america doesn't want to be a socialist country . if you want to be a socialist country , then move to a socialist country . the other one is under fbi investigation . and not only is she under fbi investigation , she lied to the families of the victims of benghazi , and anyone who lies to the families of victims who lost their lives in the service of our country can never be the commander in chief of the united states . 
bush he wasn't my senator . 
paul no . i don't think we're any safer i do not think we are any safer from bankruptcy court . as we go further , and further into debt , we become less , and less safe . this is the most important thing we're going to talk about tonight . can you be a conservative , and be liberal on military spending ? can you be for unlimited military spending , and say , oh , i'm going to make the country safe ? no , we need a safe country , but , you know , we spend more on our military than the next ten countries combined ? i want a strong national defense , but i don't want us to be bankrupt . bell ringing crosstalk 
trump so , if it weren't for me , you wouldn't even be talking about illegal immigration , chris . you wouldn't even be talking about it . this was not a subject that was on anybody's mind until i brought it up at my announcement . and i said , mexico is sending . except the reporters , because they're a very dishonest lot , generally speaking , in the world of politics , they didn't cover my statement the way i said it . the fact is , since then , many killings , murders , crime , drugs pouring across the border , are money going out and the drugs coming in . and i said we need to build a wall , and it has to be built quickly . and i don't mind having a big beautiful door in that wall so that people can come into this country legally . but we need , jeb , to build a wall , we need to keep illegals out . cheering and applause 
trump well , i can say this . if the president , and if i were president now , i would certainly want to try and nominate a justice . i'm sure that , frankly , i'm absolutely sure that president obama will try and do it . i hope that our senate is going to be able mitch , and the entire group , is going to be able to do something about it . in times of delay , we could have a diane sykes , or you could have a bill pryor we have some fantastic people . but this is a tremendous blow to conservatism . it's a tremendous blow , frankly , to our country . 
carson since i was attacked too . 
cruz well , you know , i'm reminded of what fdr's grandfather said . he said , all horse thieves are democrats , but not all democrats are horse thieves . laughter in this instance , there are millions of peaceful muslims across the world , in countries like india , where there is not the problems we are seeing in nations that are controlled have territory controlled by al qaida or isis , and we should direct at the problem , focus on the problem , and defeat radical islamic terrorism . it's not a war on a faith ; it's a war on a political and theocratic ideology that seeks to murder us . 
trump . . . the biggest problem , i'll have you know . . . 
huckabee it has to do with the incredibly dangerous place that this world is gonna be as a result of a deal in which we got nothing . we didn't even get four hostages out . we got nothing , and iran gets everything they want . we said we would have anywhere , anytime negotiations and inspections , we gave that up . we said that we would make sure that they didn't have any nuclear capacity , we gave that up . the president can't tell us what we got . i'll tell you what the world got . the world has a burgeoning nuclear power that didn't , as the soviets , say we might defend ourselves in a war . what the iranians have said is , we will wipe israel off the face of the map , and we will bring death to america . when someone points a gun at your head timer sounds and loads it , by god , you ought to take them seriously , and we need to take that seriously . 
bush south carolinians want to make that , they elect the most conservative governor or candidate that can win . 
trump i want everybody taken care of , but we have to take care of our people in this country . we're not taking care of our people . we have no border . we have no control . people are flooding across . we can't have it . we either have a border , and i'm very strongly i'm not proposing . i will build a wall . i will build a wall . remember this , the wall will be paid for by mexico . we are not being treated right . we are not being treated properly . if we don't have borders , if we don't have strength , we don't have a country . people are flowing across . we have to take care of our people . believe me . 
bush september 30th you said . . . 
carson he's an ok doctor . laughter and applause but , you know , the fact of the matter is , we have extremely well documented proof that there's no autism associated with vaccinations . but it is true that we are probably giving way too many in too short a period of time . and a lot of pediatricians now recognize that , and , i think , are cutting down on the number and the proximity in which those are done , and i think that's appropriate . 
rubio well , i think conservatism is about three things and donald touched on one of them , but it's about three things . the first is conservatism is about limited government , especially at the federal level . the federal government is a limited government , limited by the constitution , which delineates its powers . if it's not in the constitution , it does not belong to the federal government . it belongs to states , local communities and the private sector . it's about free enterprise , which is an economic model that allows everyone to rise without pulling anyone down . the reason why free enterprise is the greatest economic model in the history of the world is because it's the only economic model where you can make poor people richer without making rich people poor . and it's about a strong national defense . it's about believing , unlike barack obama , that the world is a safer and a better place when america is the strongest military and the strongest nation on this planet . that's conservatism . 
trump here's a man robin hood . this is robin hood over here . he talks about corruption . on his financial disclosure form , he didn't even put that he's borrowed money from citibank and from goldman sachs , which is a total violation . he didn't talk about the fact that he pays almost no interest . he just left it off , and now he's going to protect the people from the big bad banks . give me a break . 
cruz jake , there is no more important topic in 2016 than this topic right here , and i've listened to several folks saying , well , gosh , if they cheat , we'll act . we won't know under this agreement there are several facilities in iran they designate as military facilities that are off limit all together . beyond that , the other facilities , we give them 24 days notice before inspecting them . that is designed to allow them to hide the evidence . and most astonishingly , this agreement trusts the iranians to inspect themselves . that makes no sense whatsoever . and let me know president obama is violating federal law . . . 
bush you said on september 30th that isis was not a factor . 
trump go ahead . i'm relaxed . you're the basket case . crosstalk go ahead . 
fiorina that's right , three pages . 
rubio because at the time , apple was portraying that the court order was to create a back door to an encryption device . 
cruz so i'll tell you what . . . 
kasich all right , look , honestly , when i see people at these meetings , these town halls , where we take massive questions , and i get to spend time with them . last night , there was a woman that came to tell me about the loss of her 15 year old son , who took his own life . see , there's people in this country and ted's right their wages haven't gone up for so long , they see the rich get richer , they believe , and they're not moving . and they put their money in the bank , and they got no interest on their money . they receive none . and their sons or daughters are living in the basement because they can't get a good job after they rang up so much college debt . what people are hungry for is , who can fix this ? people want to know who what can you do to solve the problems in washington , to make sure that we have stronger job growth and better wages ? but you know what else they're yearning for ? they want to believe that they have the power to fix things where they live , and they want the power back , so they can begin to do things in their community . now , listen , this has been going on for a long time here . and i appreciate the discussion back and forth . but there are a lot of people out there yearning for somebody who's going to bring america back , both at the leadership level and in the neighborhood , where we can begin to reignite the spirit of the united states of america . and let's stop fighting . 
bush no . the simple fact is , donald , you could not take 
kasich well , i'm not going to talk about that . i mean , i've got to tell you , i was with this little 12 year old girl , was at a town hall meeting , and she said , you know , i don't like all this yelling and screaming at the debates . my mother's thinking i might not be able to watch the thing anymore . i think we ought to move beyond that , about what they think . i'm going to tell you what i think . my position on this whole immigration issue has been clear from the beginning . i haven't changed anything with it . and , look , my view is , we need economic growth . everything starts with economic growth . and how do you get it ? common sense regulations , lower taxes for both business and individuals , and , of course , a fiscal plan that balances the budget . that gives you economic growth . i did it when i was in washington , as the budget committee chairman , negotiating actually with democrats , that gave us surpluses , economic growth , and the same thing in ohio . but here's the thing that i believe . economic growth is not an end unto itself . we have to make sure that everybody has a sense that they can rise . of course , our friends in the hispanic community , our friends in the african american community , the promise of america is that our system , when we follow the right formula , is going to give opportunity for everyone . it's what jack kemp used to say . a rising tide lifts all boats , not just some boats , but all boats . and you know what ? with me and the hispanic community , i think they like me . and i appreciate that , because i want them to have the same opportunity that i and my children and my wife and the people we love have had in this country . it's time to solve problems . 
rubio leadership is ultimately about solving the problem . and the approach that was tried and has been tried now repeatedly over ten years to do this comprehensively , all at once in a massive piece of legislation has no chance of passage . it is not leadership to continue to try something that has no chance of happening . i want to make progress on this issue . it has been discussed now for 30 years and nothing ever happens . and i am telling you that the only way forward on this issue that has any chance of happening , meaning gaining the support of the american people , you cannot do this without the support of the american people , is an approach that begins by proving that once and for all , illegal immigration is under control . 
cruz you know , it's interesting , donald just said that he never came out in favor of toppling gadhafi in libya . well , he stated that in an interview that will be on our web site , tedcruz . org . you can see and hear the exact words from donald's mouth . and i assume when he sees that interview , maybe he forgot about it , but i assume donald will apologize where he sees that he said exactly that . with regard to john kerry , i will say john kerry's foreign policy has been a disaster for decades . that's why i voted against him when he came up . and the fact that donald trump would write him a check and support him against george w . bush shows exceptionally poor foreign policy judgment . and i'll give one more example on israel . when the obama administration canceled civilian air flights into the national of israel , when hamas was raining rockets down on them , i publicly asked , is this an economic boycott against israel ? the next day michael bloomberg , another new york billionaire , got on a plane , a commercial flight , and flew to israel from london . together the heat and light that was put on the state department was so great that within 36 hours they lifted the ban on air flights into israel . during that entire battle , and indeed during every battle on israel the natural question is , where was donald ? if this is something he cares about , why has he supported anti israel politicians from jimmy carter to hillary clinton to john kerry for four decades ? if you care about israel , you don't write checks to politicians who are undermining israel . instead you stand and support the national security of america and the alliance with israel . crosstalk 
cruz but , donald , please , i know it's hard not to interrupt . but try . 
kasich in the state of ohio , the state of ohio , we have grown 347 , 000 jobs . our unemployment is half of what it was . our fracking industry , energy industry may have contributed 20 , 000 , but if mr . trump understood that the real jobs come in the downstream , not in the upstream , but in the downstream . and that's where we're going to get our jobs . but ohio is diversified . and little false little things , sir , they don't really work when it comes to the truth . so the fact is , all i'm suggesting , we can't ship 11 million people out of this country . children would be terrified , and it will not work . crosstalk 
trump . . . wrong . . . 
trump such a nasty such a nasty question , but thank you , governor . 
trump and , by the way , just so you understand , as far as iran , i would have never made that deal . i think it's maybe the world deal i've ever seen . i think it's the worst deal i've ever seen negotiated . i will be so tough on them and ultimately that deal will be broken unless they behave better than they've ever behaved in their lives , which is probably unlikely . that deal will be broken . 
kasich hello , i'm john kasich , the governor of ohio . emma , and reese , my children , and karen , love 'ya girls . thanks for watching tonight . by the way , i think i actually flew on this plane with ronald reagan when i was a congressman , and his goals , and mine , really much are pretty much the same . lift americans , unify , give hope , grow america , and restore it is to that great , shining city on a hill . yes , he was a great one , and i learned much from watching him . the most important thing , hope to americans , unify , lift everyone in america . 
rubio well , first of all , i don't know how he knows what i said on univision , because he doesn't speak spanish . and second of all , the other point that i would make . . . 
trump take a look at your numbers . 
trump first of all , i respect what ted just said , but if you noticed , he didn't answer your question . and that's what's going to happen 
carson i think you have to ask them about that . i don't want to get in between them . let them fight . crosstalk 
cruz and with hillary clinton . . . 
kasich well , let me just say this . first of all , i think it's a bad agreement , i would never have done it . but , you know , a lot of our problems in the world today is that we don't have the relationship with our allies . if we want to go everywhere alone , we will not have the strength as ph if we could rebuild with our allies . now , this agreement , we don't know what's going to happen in 18 months . i served on the defense committee for 18 years . i've seen lots of issues in foreign affairs , and foreign in terms of global politics , you have to be steady . now , here's the if they cheat , we slap the sanctions back on . if they help hamas , and hezbollah , we slap the sanctions back on . and , if we find out that they may be developing a nuclear weapon , than the military option is on the table . we are stronger when we work with the western civilization , our friends in europe , and just doing it on our own i don't think is the right policy . 
bush when i during my time , we were one of the two states to go to aaa bond rating . we didn't go bankrupt like trump did and call it success when people are laid off , when vendors don't get paid . that's not success . what we did was create an environment where people had a chance to have income . personal income during my time went up by 4 . 4 percent . 
cruz brett , can i brett , can i jump in on this one ? 
bush here's what i believe . i believe we're at the verge of the greatest time to be alive in this world . but washington is holding us back . how we tax , how we regulate . we're not embracing the energy revolution in our midst , a broken immigration system that has been politicized rather than turning it into an economic driver . we're not protecting and preserving our entitlement system or reforming for the next generation . all these things languish while we have politicians in washington using these as wedge issues . here's my commitment to you , because i did it as florida . we can fix these things . we can grow economically and restore america's leadership in the world , so that everybody has a chance to rise up . i humbly ask for your vote , whenever you're gonna get to vote , whenever the primary is . thank you all very much . 
trump eighty five percent say you , big difference . 
rubio no , of course not . and we don't have to in order to defeat terrorists . the way you defeat terrorists is pretty straightforward . it's difficult to do , but it has to be done . when i'm president of the united states , the best intelligence agencies in the world that right now have been hamstrung . they're going to be expanded . and the best intelligence agencies in the world are going to find terrorists . and then the best military in the world , which needs to be rebuilt because because barack obama is gutting our military . he's going to leave us with the smallest army since the end of world war ii , and the smallest navy in a century , and the smallest air force we've ever had . we are going to rebuild that military and that military is going to find the terrorists and destroy them . and if we capture any of these terrorists alive , they're not going to have the right to remain silent . and they're not going to go to a courtroom in manhattan . they're going to go to guantanamo bay , cuba and we will find out everything they know and we'll do so legally . 
cruz why don't you release the tapes ? release the tapes . 
bush we don't need the federal government to be involved in this at all . 
kasich good question , but i want to tell you , my great concern is that we are on the verge , perhaps , of picking someone who cannot do this job . i've watched to see people say that we should dismantle medicare and medicaid and leave the senior citizens out out in the in the cold . i've heard them talk about deporting 10 or 11 people here from this country out of this country , splitting families . i've heard about tax schemes that don't add up , that put our kids in in a deeper hole than they are today . we need somebody who can lead . we need somebody who can balance budgets , cut taxes . . . 
carson well , first of all , i recognize that we have an incredible illegal immigration problem . i was down in arizona a few weeks ago at the border . i mean , the fences that were there were not manned , and those are the kind of fences when i was a kid that would barely slow us down . so , i don't see any purpose in having that . now , what we need to do is look at something that actually works . yuma county , arizona . they stop 97 percent of the illegal immigrants through there . they put in a double fence with a road so that there was quick access by the enforcement people . if we don't seal the border , the rest of this stuff clearly doesn't matter . it's kind of ridiculous all the other things we talk about . we have the ability to do it , we don't have the will to do it . there was one area where they had cut a hole in the fence , and to repair it , they put a few strands of barb wire across . well , the photographers who were there with us , they wanted to photograph us from the side of the mexicans , and they went through there , and they were not physically fit people , and they took their cameras and things with them , and shot us from the other side . that's how easy it is to get across . and , the drugs , i mean , it goes on , and on , and on . ice tells them to release these people , 67 , 000 criminals released . . . 
rubio well , you should ask him questions in detail about the foreign policy issues our president will confront , because you had better be able to lead our country on the first day . not six months from now , not a year from now , on the first day in office , our president could very well confront a national security crisis . you can't predict it . sometimes you cannot control it . and it is the most the federal government does all kinds of things it's not supposed to be doing . it regulates bathrooms . it regulates schools that belong to local communities . but the one thing that the federal government must do , the one thing that only the federal government can do is keep us safe . and a president better be up to date on those issues on his first day in office , on her first day in office . 
cruz who pays for it ? 
trump jake , i have to say honestly , it's just the opposite . what will happen if they don't behave , we will put on a tax of some amount , and it could be a large amount , and we will start building those factories and those plants . instead of in china , we'll build them here . and people will buy products from here , rather than buying it through china where we're being ripped off . and we have a 505 billion trade deficit right now . so we'll build our factories here and we'll make our own products . and that's the way it should be done . and the way we've been doing it for the last long period of time is our country our country is in serious , serious trouble . it's a bubble and it's going to explode , believe me . 
rubio let me just say let me finish the statement . this is important . 
cruz so you you would bail them out . 
trump by the way , unlike our country where we're totally predictable and the enemy , whether it's isis or anybody else , they know exactly what we're doing because we have the wrong leadership . but i feel that the gun free zones and , you know , when you say that , that's target practice for the sickos and for the mentally ill . that's target . they look around for gun free zones . you know , we could give you another example the marines , the army , these wonderful six soldiers that were killed . two of them were among the most highly decorated they weren't allowed on a military base to have guns . and somebody walked in and shot them , killed them . if they had guns , he wouldn't be around very long . i can tell you , there wouldn't have been much damage . so , i think gun free zones are a catastrophe . they're a feeding frenzy for sick people . 
kasich well , i'd like to say to all of you , the american people , i have run an unwavering , positive campaign for president of the united states . i have tried to be positive in such a way as to show my record , my accomplishments , my vision . and i wanted to raise the bar in presidential politics so our kids can take a look at the way you can run for president and you will someday maybe be president of the united states . sometimes being positive isn't all that interesting , but it's very interesting to my family , my children and so many supporters that i meet all across the country and i will continue to run a positive campaign . i can fix the problems in washington , i've done it before . and , in fact , i want to turn power , money and influence back to you , the american people , so that you can be in the schools and on the streets fighting drugs and dealing with the issues of poverty . we can do this together . allow me to take care of the federal issues when i send the power back and the money and the influence to you and you can strengthen our nation and our neighborhoods and our families . that's where the spirit and strength of america is . but ask the people my friends in illinois and of course , my beloved buckeyes to consider me on tuesday and , please , let me have your vote . god bless . 
carson one nation . 
paul see , here's the problem . 
trump inaudible . i don't know what you're talking about . 
huckabee i'm mike huckabee . i'm delighted to be on this stage with some remarkable fellow republicans . none of us are a self professed socialist . none of us on this state are under investigation by the fbi because we destroyed government records , or because we leaked secrets . i know that there are some in the wall street to washington axis of power who speak of all of us contemptuously . but i'm here to say that i think we are , in fact , the a team . we have some remarkable people , and , in fact , not only are we the a team ; we even have our own mr . t , who doesn't mind saying about others , you're a fool . and i'm delighted to be here with all of these guys , and would put any of them in an administration that i led . thank you very much . 
christie i think he mentioned me and my record in there , so i think i get a chance to respond . you see , everybody , i want the people at home to think about this . that's what washington , d . c . does . the drive by shot at the beginning with incorrect and incomplete information and then the memorized 25 second speech that is exactly what his advisers gave him . see marco marco , the thing is this . when you're president of the united states , when you're a governor of a state , the memorized 30 second speech where you talk about how great america is at the end of it doesn't solve one problem for one person . they expect you to plow the snow . they expect you to get the schools open . and when the worst natural disaster in your state's history hits you , they expect you to rebuild their state , which is what i've done . none of that stuff happens on the floor of the united states senate . it's a fine job , i'm glad you ran for it , but it does not prepare you for president of the united states . 
huckabee one final thing . i'd make darn sure that we absolutely believe the 10th amendment . every governor on this stage would share this much with you . every one of us our biggest fight wasn't always with the legislature or even with the democrats . my gosh , half the time , it was with the federal government who apparently never understood 
kasich . . . so they can print the money . that would be a very bad approach . 
carson you know , 14 percent decrease in the number of people applying for voluntary military service , and i think part of it is because of the way that we treat our veterans . you know , we wouldn't be a free country if it wasn't for them , and we have 22 veterans per day committing suicide . so , i think what we should do is have an external support system for people once they volunteer and it should follow them throughout their career , should follow them for three years , five years afterwards , a year before they get out , should be working on integrating them back into society , so that they quit on friday and they start their new job . they should have health empowerment accounts that are subsidized so they can go to any medical facility and be taken care of . they can go to a v . a . if they want to . but if we start taking care of our veterans the right way , we won't have to ever worry about a draft again . 
walker harley . i love riding harley's . 
bush how tough it is to take away property from an elderly woman ? 
huckabee not me . laughter but you're welcome to give me a check , donald if you'd like . 
trump oh , let me just say look , i am very open i hired top people . i've had great success . i built a great , great company . i don't need to do this . i'm self funding . i'm spending a lot of money . i've spent like in new hampshire , i spent 3 million . jeb bush spent 44 million . he came in five , and i came in no . 1 . that's what the country needs , folks . i spent 3 , he spends 42 of their money , of special interest money . and it's just this is not going to make excuse me . this is not going to make our country great again . this is not what we need in our country . we need people that know what the hell they're doing . and politicians , they're all talk , they're no action . and that's why people are supporting me . i do listen to people . i hire experts . i hire top , top people . and i do listen . and you know what ? sometimes they're wrong . you have to know what to do , when to do it . but sometimes they're wrong . 
trump . . . yes . 
cruz no , kennedy was confirmed in '87 . . . 
rubio well , the problem with the sunni forces in the region is they don't trust this administration . this administration cut a deal with their mortal enemies , the shia , in iran . it poisoned the well with these countries . it makes it very difficult to cooperate with them as a result . they also , by the way , understand what real u . s . air power looks like . they saw the iraq war . they saw , up close , also afghanistan . they know what air power looks like when the united states is committed to the cause . and they see the airstrikes that are being conducted now , and they say to themselves , that's not real commitment . we know what real commitment looks like . the the jordanian king was in washington three weeks ago . he told everyone who would listen that they have begged for permission from the coalition to target caravans . and the coalition meaning u . s . leadership on the ground . . . bell rings . . . would not allow them to proceed with those airstrikes . 
trump excuse me . i think it's very unprofessional . 
christie . . . is to make sure that you use the system the way it's supposed to work . 
bush you wanted it and you didn't get it because i was opposed to 
trump . . . is it's total gridlock . nobody gets along . we need people to get along . we need to be able to get things done . 
cruz you don't want to hear the answer . you just want to . . . crosstalk 
rubio well , first of all , and before we do anything , i've been abundantly clear on this . when i'm president of the united states , before we do anything on immigration , we are going to secure the border . and , that's not just the physical border with mexico , it's visa overstays . that's 45 percent of the problem right there . it also has to do that's why we need e verify , and entry exit tracking system , and so forth . and , until that happens , we're not doing anything else . and then we'll see what the american people are willing to support . and donald mentioned , because he mentioned me in his answer , that his position on immigration is what has driven this debate . well , the truth is , though , that a lot of these positions that he's now taking are new to him . in 2011 , he talked about the need for a pathway to citizenship . in 2012 , donald criticized mitt romney , saying that mitt lost his election because of self deportation . and so even today , we saw a report in one of the newspapers that donald , you've hired a significant number of people from other countries to take jobs that americans could have filled . my mom and dad my mom was a maid at a hotel , and instead of hiring an american like her , you have brought in over a thousand people from all over the world to fill those jobs instead . so i think this is an important issue . and i think we are realizing increasingly that it's an important issue for the country that has been debated for 30 years , but finally needs to be solved once and for all . 
cruz what you do is , you enforce the law . you know , under the constitution , the president has an obligation to , quote , take care that the laws be faithfully executed . federal immigration law provides , if someone is here illegally and is apprehended , they are to be deported . we saw just this past week the head of the border patrol union testify before congress that president obama had given the order to the border patrol to stand down , not to enforce the law . that is wrong . i will enforce the law , and for everyone who says , you can't possibly do that , i would note that in eight years , bill clinton deported 12 million people . in eight years , george w . bush deported 10 million people . enforcing the law we can do it . what is missing is the political will . and when they were deporting the people , the border wasn't secure , so they'd come right back . once you secure the border , enforcing the law will solve this problem and that will benefit american workers . 
cruz . . . to hillary clinton on the debate stage when you wrote her a check in 2008 , wrote her four checks to be president ? 
trump you probably are worse than jeb bush . you are single biggest liar . this guy's lied let me just tell you , this guy lied about ben carson when he took votes away from ben carson in iowa , and he just continues . today , we had robo calls saying , donald trump is not going to run in south carolina , where i'm leading by a lot . i'm not going to vote for ted cruz . this is the same thing he did to ben carson . this guy will say anything , nasty guy . now i know why he doesn't have one endorsement from any of his colleagues . 
cruz well , you're right , the news is very disturbing that kim jong un has put their nuclear weapons on ready state . i'm glad that we're sending another carrier group to the south china sea . i'm glad that congress passed sanctions on north korea . but this is all the result of the failures of the clinton administration two decades ago that negotiated a deal with north korea lifting the sanctions , allowing billions of dollars to flow in , and they used that money to develop nuclear weapons in the first place . what we now we're in a much harder position . when you have a lunatic with nuclear weapons , to some extent , it constrains your options . we need to be moving the carrier carrier group to the south china seas . we we need to be putting in place missile defense , such as the thaad missile defense system in south korea . we need to be pursuing space based missile defense . one of the advantages of space based missile defense is that if you have a missile launch in north korea or you have a missile launch in iran , a space based missile defense can take out one or two or three missiles before it can cross over and do damage . and we also need to be putting pressure on china , because north korea is effectively a a client state of china . all of that will happen with a strong commander in chief that is devoted to keeping this country safe . 
rubio here we go . it's personal . audience booing crosstalk 
kasich i called for boots on the ground many months ago in a coalition with our friends who share our interest . you know , you win a battle with the military , and when we go somewhere , we need to be mobile , and lethal . we need to take care of business , and we need to come home . but , we face , also , a bigger war and you win the bigger war with the battle of ideas . you wonder why young people , and educated people , rich people , schooled people , have tried to join isis . western civilization , all of us , need to wake up to the fact that those murderers and rapists need to be called out , and in western civilization we need to make it clear that our faith in the jewish and christian principals force us to live a life bigger than ourselves . . . 
kasich i'll have to see this . begin video clip 
trump . . . before they had the information . . . 
rubio but i've answered that question repeatedly . i am personally open after all that has happened and after ten years in that probationary status where all they have is a permit , i personally am open to allowing people to apply for a green card . that may not be a majority position in my party , but that's down the road . you can't even begin that process until you prove to people not just pass a law that says you're gonna bring illegal immigration under control . you're gonna have to do it and prove to people that it's working . and that was the lesson of 2013 . and it's more true today , than it was then . after a migratory crisis on the border with minors coming over that you're seeing start up again now , after all these executive orders the president has issued . more than ever we need to . . . 
bush because you gave her money . maybe it works for hillary clinton 
trump let me well , let me just explain . the head of the yale business school , jeffrey sonnenfeld , wrote a paper recently , one of the worst tenures for a ceo that he has ever seen , ranked one of the top 20 in the history of business . the company is a disaster and continues to be a disaster . they still haven't recovered . in fact , today , on the front page of the wall street journal , they fired another 25 or 30 , 000 people saying we still haven't recovered from the catastrophe . when carly says the revenues went up , that's because she bought compaq , it was a terrible deal , and it really led to the destruction of the company . now one other company before that was lucent . carly was at lucent before that . and lucent turned out to be a catastrophe also . so i only say this . she can't run any of my companies . that i can tell you . 
kasich look , i'm i'm not here i like chris . 
rubio i spoke to one of the victims yesterday . 
trump you'd better believe it . 
huckabee just today just today , there was a new report that 50 different intelligence analysts have said that what they sent up the ladder was doctored by senior officials , so that they could give some happy talk to the situation that we face . i love the idea of a good intellectual capacity to deal with our enemies , but the fact is , if you don't have good intelligence that is reliable and honest , you won't have good intelligence and you cannot make good decisions . the next president is primarily elected not just to know things , but to know what to do with the things that he knows . and the most dangerous person in any room is the person who doesn't know what he doesn't know . 
cruz becky , if you want a 10 percent flat tax where the numbers add up , i rolled out my tax plan today , you can find it on line at tedcruz . org . it is a simple flat tax where for individuals , a family of four pays nothing on the first 36 , 000 . after that you pay 10 percent as a flat tax going up . the billionaire and the working man , no hedge fund manager pays less than his secretary . on top of that , there is a business flat tax of 16 percent . now that applies universally to giant corporations that with lobbyists right now are not paying taxes , and as small business . and you wanted to know the numbers , the tax foundation , which has scored every one of our plans , shows that this plan will allow the economy to generate 4 . 9 million jobs , to raise wages over 12 percent , and to generate 14 percent growth . and it costs , with dynamic scoring , less than a trillion dollars . those are the hard numbers . and every single income decile sees a double digit increase in after tax income . 
rubio if you're our nominee inaudible . . . 
trump that's not let me respond . that's another lie . i never went bankrupt ! crosstalk 
paul . . . indiscriminately , of all americans' records , and that's what i fought to end . i don't trust president obama with our records . i know you gave him a big hug , and if you want to give him a big hug again , go right ahead . 
rubio i do . first , let's explain to people at home who the triad what the triad is . maybe a lot of people haven't heard that terminology before . the triad is our ability of the united states to conduct nuclear attacks using airplanes , using missiles launched from silos or from the ground , and also from our nuclear subs' ability to attack . and it's important all three of them are critical . it gives us the ability at deterrence . now , some have become more critical than others ; for example , the submarines . and that's the ohio class submarine that needs to be modernized . the air component also needs to be modernized . the b 52 , as someone earlier pointed out , is an outdated model that was flown by the grandparents of people that are flying it now . and we need a serious modernization program as well on our silo launched missiles . all three are critical for the defense of the country . 
cruz . . . defeating radical islamic terrorists . 
cruz welcome to texas . here , texas provided my family with hope . here , my mom became the first in her family ever to go to college . here , my dad fled cuba and washed dishes , making 50 cents an hour to pay his way through the university of texas . i graduated from high school at second baptist not too far away from here . when i ran for senate , i promised 27 million texans i would fight for you every day , and not for the washington bosses . and , i'll tell you , as i travel the state , democrats tell me i didn't vote for you , but you're doing what you said you would do . and , as president , i will do the same . 
cruz well , dana , the premise of your question is not accurate . i'm very proud to have joined with conservatives in both the senate and the house to reform how we target bad guys . and what the usa freedom act did is it did two things . number one , it ended the federal government's bulk collection of phone metadata of millions of law abiding citizens . but number two in the second half of it that is critical . it strengthened the tools of national security and law enforcement to go after terrorists . it gave us greater tools and we are seeing those tools work right now in san bernardino . and in particular , what it did is the prior program only covered a relatively narrow slice of phone calls . when you had a terrorist , you could only search a relatively narrow slice of numbers , primarily land lines . the usa freedom act expands that so now we have cell phones , now we have internet phones , now we have the phones that terrorists are likely to use and the focus of law enforcement is on targeting the bad guys . you know what the obama administration keeps getting wrong is whenever anything bad happens they focus on law abiding citizens instead of focusing on the bad guys . we need to focus on radical islamic terrorists and we need to stop them before they carry out acts of terror . 
cruz so let me be clear . i would not bail them out , but instead of adjusting monetary policy according to whims and getting it wrong over and over again and causing booms and busts , what the fed should be doing is , number one , keeping our money tied to a stable level of gold , and , number two , serving as a lender of last resort . that's what central banks do . so if you have a run on the bank , the fed can serve as a lender of last resort , but it's not a bailout . it is a loan at higher interest rates . that's how central banks have worked . and i'll point out look , we had a gold standard under bretton woods , we had it for about 170 years of our nation's history , and enjoyed booming economic growth and lower inflation than we have had with the fed now . we need to get back to sound money , which helps , in particular , working men and women . what washington does the people who are doing well in the obama economy are those with power and influence in the obama government . the people who inaudible working men and women . . . crosstalk 
rubio well , first of all , government doesn't . . . audience booing first of all , chris , my point is exactly right . he has spent a career of convincing americans that he's something that he's not in exchange for their money . now he's trying to do the same in exchange for their country . this is a fact . he talks about these great businesses that he's built . he inherited over 100 million . 
trump inaudible i watched him repeat himself five times four weeks ago . . . 
cruz but if , in fact , you went to manhattan and said i'm lying to the american people , then the voters have a right to know . 
trump . . . let 44 million in new hampshire , it was practically inaudible . . . 
rubio . . . i just watched you repeat yourself five times five seconds ago . . . 
cruz . . . a regime we should change is iran . . . 
cruz . . . who is telling the truth . . . crosstalk if you want to assess who is telling the truth . . . . . . then you should look to jeff sessions , who said , without ted cruz the rubio schumer amnesty bill would have passed , and ted was responsible . you should look to rush limbaugh and mark levin , that said . . . crosstalk 
fiorina this doesn't do a thing to solve the problems . . . it doesn't do a thing to solve the problems . crosstalk 
carson ok . well first of all , people say that i whine a lot because i don't get time . i'm going to whine because i didn't get asked about taxes , i didn't get asked about israel . hugh , you said you're going to be fair to everybody , you didn't ask me about taxes . i had something to say about that . now . . . 
trump should i respond to that first ? 
trump let me just tell you , they de value their currencies . china , mexico , everybody . japan with the cars . they de value their currencies to such an extent that our businesses cannot compete with them , our workers lose their jobs . . . 
rubio well , sure if the climate is changing and one of the reasons is because the climate has always been changing . there's never been a time when the climate has not changed . i think the fundamental question for a policy maker is , is the climate changing because of something we are doing and if so , is there a law you can pass to fix it ? so on the issue of flooding in miami , it's caused by two things . number one , south florida is largely built on land that was once a swamp . and number two , because if there is higher sea levels or whatever it may be happening , we do need to deal with that through mitigation . and i have long supported mitigation efforts . but as far as a law that we can pass in washington to change the weather , there's no such thing . on the contrary , there is laws they want us to pass . there are laws they want to us pass that would be devastating for our economy or these programs like what the president has put in with the clean power act or all these sorts of things that he's forcing down our throats on the war on coal . let me tell you who is going to pay the price of that ? americans are going to pay the price of that . the cost of doing that is going to be rammed down the throats of the american consumer , the single parent , the working families who are going to see increases in the cost of living . the businesses who are going to leave america because it's more expensive to do business here than anywhere else . and you know what passing those laws would have what impact it would have on the environment ? zero , because china is still going to be polluting and india is still going to be polluting at historic levels . so , i am in favor of a clean environment . my children live in south florida . my family is being raised here . i want this to be a safe and clean place , but these laws some people are asking us to pass will do nothing for the environment and they will hurt and devastate our economy . 
trump no , no , i'm the only one on the stage that's hired people . you haven't hired anybody . 
trump go ahead . don't get nervous . 
kasich we can have it , and we can have our allies , and we can be strong as a country , and we can project across this globe with unity , not just doing it alone . that is not what gets us where we want to get as a nation . 
paul i still say exactly what my original opinion is . do you borrow money from china to send it to anyone ? out of your surplus , you can help your allies , and israel is a great ally . and this is no particular animus of israel , but what i will say , and i will say over and over again , we cannot give away money we don't have . we do not project power from bankruptcy court . we're borrowing a million dollars a minute . it's got to stop somewhere . 
trump all i can say is , you're lucky in ohio that you struck oil . that is for one thing . laughter let me just tell you that dwight eisenhower , good president , great president , people liked him . i like ike , right ? the expression . i like ike . moved a 1 . 5 million illegal immigrants out of this country , moved them just beyond the border . they came back . moved them again beyond the border , they came back . didn't like it . moved them way south . they never came back . laughter dwight eisenhower . you don't get nicer . you don't get friendlier . they moved a 1 . 5 million out . we have no choice . we have no choice . crosstalk 
cruz . . . or , even some famous colorado brownies . 
kasich excuse me . 
cruz absolutely , yes . 
kasich i was on morning joe at a town hall and a young student stood up and said , can i still be idealistic ? i said , absolutely , you can still change the world . and , you know the old inscription , if you save one life , you've changed the world . folks , we have a problem here with the leadership in washington , but i'll tell you another problem . we need to rebuild our families . we need to have stronger families . we need to know who our neighbors are . we need to come together as a country because we have to realize that america is great , not from the top down . oh yeah , we want to elect a good president , but america is great from the bottom up , and the bottom up is us in our families , in our communities , in our neighborhoods . we will renew america if we work together , and i am totally confident that we will . and god bless america . 
fiorina well , first i'll just point out that talking tough is not the same as being strong . and to wage war , we need a commander in chief who has made tough calls in tough times and stood up to be held accountable over and over , not first term senators who've never made an executive decision in their life . one of the things i would immediately do , in addition to defeating them here at home , is bring back the warrior class petraeus , mcchrystal , mattis , keane , flynn . every single one of these generals i know . every one was retired early because they told president obama things that he didn't want to hear . we must have sunni arabs involved in this coalition . we must commit leadership , strength , support and resolve . i'll just add that margaret thatcher once said , if you want something talked about , ask a man ; if you want something done , ask a woman . 
trump you know what ? call it what you want . 
bush casino gambling before 
trump no . 
trump and by the way , this country right now owes 19 trillion . and they need somebody like me to straighten out that mess . 
trump i will not make the pledge at this time . 
carson i'd put my mother on there . you know , she was one of 24 children , got married at age 13 , had only a third grade education , had to raise two sons by herself , refused to be a victim . wouldn't let us be victims , and has been an inspiration to many people . 
cruz then name one specific thing you've done . 
bush donald , donald can i i hope you reconsider this , because this policy is a policy that makes it impossible to build the coalition necessary to take out isis . the kurds are our strongest allies . they're muslim . you're not going to even allow them to come to our country ? the other arab countries have a role to play in this . we cannot be the world's policeman . we can't do this unilaterally . we have to do this in unison with the arab world . and sending that signal makes it impossible for us to be serious about taking out isis and restoring democracy in syria . so i hope you'll reconsider . i hope you'll reconsider . the better way of dealing with this the better way of dealing with this is recognizing that there are people in , you know , the islamic terrorists inside , embedded in refugee populations . what we ought to do is tighten up our efforts to deal with the entry visa program so that a citizen from europe , it's harder if they've been traveling to syria or traveling to these other places where there is islamic terrorism , make it harder make the screening take place . we don't have to have refugees come to our country , but all muslims , seriously ? what kind of signal does that send to the rest of the world that the united states is a serious player in creating peace and security ? 
rubio you lied to the students at trump university . 
rubio i'll support the republican nominee . 
trump well , first of all , the the 14th amendment says very , very clearly to a lot of great legal scholars not television scholars , but legal scholars that it is wrong . it can be corrected with an act of congress , probably doesn't even need that . a woman gets pregnant . she's nine months , she walks across the border , she has the baby in the united states , and we take care of the baby for 85 years . i don't think so . and by the way , mexico and almost every other country anywhere in the world doesn't have that . we're the only ones dumb enough , stupid enough to have it . and people and by the way , this is not just with respect to mexico . they are coming from asia to have babies here , and all of a sudden , we have to take care of the babies for the life of the baby . the 14th amendment , it reads properly , you can go and it's probably going to be have to be check go through a process of court , probably ends up at the supreme court , but there are a lot of great legal scholars that say that is not correct . and in my opinion , it makes absolutely no we're the only one of the only countries , we're going to take care of those babies for 70 , 75 , 80 , 90 years ? i don't think so . 
kasich josh , i mean , clearly , when a veteran comes home , they should get health care anywhere they want to go . in our state , which is what we should do in the country , you know , if they drive a truck from kabul to kandahar in afghanistan , we say , you can drive a truck from columbus to cleveland , and you don't have to go get a license . we're going to hand you one . and if you've got expertise in the military , we're going to give you college credit or community college credit for the things that you did for our country . and in addition to that , i'll tell you , one of the biggest things i think has to be done and i would do it as president the pentagon has got to work with the returning soldier , sailor , along with the family , and we they're the most valuable employees in the country . i call them golden employees . everybody wants to hire a veteran . but there is a disconnect between the job openings and the veteran when the veteran comes back . the veteran is a leader . the veteran is strong . the veteran is drug free . there should be no unemployment among veterans . and if the pentagon will work with the veterans' services agencies all across this country , josh , we can get people jobs and we can get them jobs quickly , get them their health care . . . bell rings . . . get them their college education . let's lift them . they're the greatest people defending the united states of america and we need to take care of them , and we will . we will . 
rubio thank you . you know , both of my parents were born into poor families on the island of cuba . they came to america because it was the only place where people like them could have a chance . here in this country , they never made it big , but the very purpose of their life was to give us the chance to do all the things they never could . my father was a bartender . and the journey from the back of that bar to this stage tonight , to me , that is the essence of the american dream . it is what makes our nation different . and i'm running for president because i want that to still be possible for the people trying to do that now . i run for president because i believe that we can't just save the american dream ; we can expand it to reach more people and change more lives than ever before . and that's why i'm asking for your vote . so we can make america greater than it has ever been . and make of this century a new american century . 
cruz in florida promising to . . . crosstalk 
kasich you know , frankly , i did it in washington , in ohio , and i will do it again in washington , if i'm president , to get this country moving again . 
trump well 
trump i don't think they like me very much . i'll tell you what . i've evolved on many issues over the years . and you know who else has ? is ronald reagan evolved on many issues . and i am pro life . and if you look at the question , i was in business . they asked me a question as to pro life or choice . and i said if you let it run , that i hate the concept of abortion . i hate the concept of abortion . and then since then , i've very much evolved . and what happened is friends of mine years ago were going to have a child , and it was going to be aborted . and it wasn't aborted . and that child today is a total superstar , a great , great child . and i saw that . and i saw other instances . and i am very , very proud to say that i am pro life . as far as being a republican is concerned , i come from a place , new york city , which is virtually , i mean , it is almost exclusively democrat . and i have really started to see some of the negatives as an example , and i have a lot of liking for this man , but the last number of months of timer sounds his brother's administration were a catastrophe . and unfortunately , those few months gave us president obama . and you can't be happy about that . 
bush we've done it 27 times since world war ii . i think we need to lift our spirits and have high , lofty expectations for this great country of ours . the new normal of two percent that the left is saying you can't do anything about is so dangerous for our country . there's 6 million people living in poverty today , more than when barack obama got elected . 6 . 5 million people are working part time , most of whom want to work full time . we've created rules and taxes on top of every aspiration of people , and the net result is we're not growing fast , income's not growing . a four percent growth strategy means you fix a convoluted tax code . you get in and you change every aspect of regulations that are job killers . you get rid of obamacare and replace it with something that doesn't suppress wages and kill jobs . you embrace the energy revolution in our country . this president and hillary clinton , who can't even say she's for the xl pipeline even after she's left ? give me a break . of course we're for it . we should be for these things to create high sustained economic growth . and frankly , timer sounds fixing our immigration system and turning it into an economic driver is part of this as well . we can do this . 
kasich there's something i want to i want to point out something here today that is it's so critically important about how the obama administration has really done such a ridiculous , feckless job here in foreign policy . first of all , we should have been supporting the rebels long ago . they could have taken assad out , and because we did nothing , the russians are in , and they're sitting in the catbird seat . we should have been helping them . i'm thankful that the aid trucks are finally getting into syria . but the fact is , had we had acted , we would have solved that problem . now , let's talk about libya . libya didn't go down because there was some people revolution . hillary clinton , samantha power and all these other people convinced the president to undermine gadhafi . they undermined him , and now they have created a cesspool in libya . and let me just say to you we have isis beginning get get a foothold in libya . we're gonna have to deal with it . there are not many major cities in libya . they're on the coast , which mostly , it's desert , but it's a problem . then we have isis in in syria , and we have isis in iraq . because this administration has not had a strong and firm foreign policy , we are going to inherit one of us here is going to inherit a total mess . . . 
rubio well , let me tell you what has happened a couple of years ago . one of the hardest decisions you'll ever make in congress is when you are asked by the president to authorize the use of force in a conflict , because you are now putting your name , on behalf of the people of your state , behind a military action , where americans in uniform could lose their life . so , in 2014 , barack obama said he would not take military action against assad unless it was authorized by the senate , beginning on the committee of foreign relations , where i am one of its members . and it was hard because you looked at the pictures . i saw the same images people saw . i'm the father of children . i saw the images of these little children been gassed and poisoned by their own leaders , and we were angry . something had to happen , and there was the sense that we needed to seek retribution . and then i looked at barack obama's plan . barack obama's plan , which john kerry later described as unbelievably small , and i concluded that that attack would not only not help the situation , it would make it actually worse . it would allow assad to stand up to the united states of america , survive a strike , stay in power and actually strengthen his grip . so it was a difficult decision to make , and when we only had a few days to look at and make a decision on it , and i voted against barack obama's plan to use force , and it was the right decision . 
walker i don't know about additional ones . we need to focus on the ones we have . you look at egypt , probably the best relationship we've had in israel , at least in my lifetime , incredibly important . you look at the saudis in fact , earlier this year , i met with saudi leaders , and leaders from the united arab emirates , and i asked them what's the greatest challenge in the world today ? set aside the iran deal . they said it's the disengagement of america . we are leading from behind under the obama clinton doctrine america's a great country . we need to stand up and start leading again , and we need to have allies , not just in israel , but throughout the persian gulf . 
bush to subject my wife into the middle of a raucous political conversation was completely inappropriate , and i hope you apologize for that , donald . 
cruz the chances of any litigation proceeding and succeeding on this are zero . and mr . trump is very focused . . . 
fiorina it will not solve the problem . 
trump . . . i know , but your recent polls have me beating hillary clinton , and very , very easily . 
trump well , i 
trump no , it's not . you take a look . he was the primary supporter . he pushed john roberts , and pushed him , and pushed him , and bush ultimately appointed him . he got appointed . and when it came his time to raise his hand and kill obamacare , not once , but twice , he let us down , and he did the wrong thing . this is the man that was the primary supporter . and you can read law journal , you can read whatever you want to read i've read plenty of it . there was no stronger supporter of john roberts than him . and it was a very , very big mistake . 
cruz well , maria , thank you for that question , and let me say thank you to the state of south carolina for welcoming us . let me start i want to get to the substance of the question on jobs , but i want to start with something . today , many of us picked up our newspapers , and we were horrified to see the sight of 10 american sailors on their knees , with their hands on their heads . in that state of the union , president obama didn't so much as mention the 10 sailors that had been captured by iran . president obama's preparing to send 100 billion or more to the ayatollah khamenei . and i'll tell you , it was heartbreaking . but the good news is the next commander in chief is standing on this stage . and i give you my word , if i am elected president , no service man or service woman will be forced to be on their knees , and any nation that captures our fighting men will feel the full force and fury of the united states of america . now , on to your substantive question . the president tried to paint a rosy picture of jobs . and you know , he's right . if you're a washington lobbyist , if you make your money in and around washington , things are doing great . the millionaires and billionaires are doing great under obama . but we have the lowest percentage of americans working today of any year since 1977 . median wages have stagnated . and the obama clinton economy has left behind the working men and women of this country . the reason all of us are here is we believe we should be fighting for the working men and women of this country , and not washington , d . c . 
bush inaudible just , for the record inaudible make sure my mother's listening , if she's watching the debate . i didn't say that i was going to moon somebody . . . 
trump i never attacked him on his look , and believe me , there's plenty of subject matter right there . laughter that i can tell you . 
trump excuse me . hey wolf , let me ask you . am i allowed to respond to this ? 
cruz you've never said that ? 
cruz you know , donald has a tenuous relationship with the truth . laughter i wrote one op ed supporting president bush's nomination after he made it . i would not have made that nomination . but let me point out . . . 
rubio but it no , it's not a sound bite . it's a fact . again , go online and google it . donald trump , polish workers . you'll see it . the second thing , about the trade war i don't understand , because your ties and the clothes you make is made in mexico and in china . so you're gonna be starting a trade war against your own ties and your own suits . 
rubio no , it's the same policy . it will have to end at some moment , and as i said , we will we will eliminate that executive order . the people that are on it now will not be allowed to renew it , and new applicants will not be allowed to apply to it . and it's not because we're not compassionate to the plight of a 2 someone who came here when they were 2 years old . i understand . i know people that are personally impacted by this . the problem with the executive order is it is unconstitutional . the president doesn't have the power to do that . and he himself admitted that . 
trump i'm happy to have him tonight . . . laughter 
christie you bet i would . and the fact is that because i took strong action to make sure that anyone who was showing symptoms remember what happened with that nurse . she was showing symptoms and coming back from a place that had the ebola virus active and she had been treating patients . this was not just some like , we picked up her just for the heck of it , alright ? we did it because she was showing symptoms , and the fact is that's the way we should make these decision . you make these decisions based upon the symptoms , the medicine , and the law . we quarantined her , she turned out to test negative ultimately after 48 hours , and we released her back to the state of maine . but , i want to add something on the issue of mosques . now , i'm the only one up here who's had a law enforcement background as a u . s . attorney after september 11th . i went to mosques throughout my state to build bridges . to build bridges between our community in law enforcement so we can get intelligence and information from these folks . i've had the experience of working with them as governor of new jersey as well . we cannot mix the radical islamic jihadist with everyday muslim americans . new jersey is the second largest muslim american population in america , of any state . these are good , law abiding , hard working people . what they need is our cooperation , and our understanding . they do not just need broadsides against them because of the religious faith they practice . 
rubio there are people who borrowed 36 , 000 . . . 
bush becky 
trump you wouldn't have massive excuse me , josh you wouldn't have massive factories without eminent domain . booing 
trump wrong . 
rubio that's correct , and libya . 
rubio well , he's just admitted as he's just admitted , the reason why those refugees were allowed in was because they messed up in how they used the actual database . they should have know . they didn't because they didn't run the actual law as it exists now . it didn't work well . as far as the refugees are concerned , it's not that america doesn't want to accept refugees , wolf . it's that we may not be able to , because this is an issue we have to be 100 percent right on . if we allow 9 , 999 syrian refugees into the united states , and all of them are good people , but we allow one person in who's an isis killer we just get one person wrong , we've got a serious problem . and there is not a single person in the national defense apparatus of this country that can guarantee you are going to be 100 percent right . and that's why as president , i'll take this very seriously . 
paul nevertheless , it's not very conservative , marco . 
carson that's not true . 
paul ours is 14 . 5 percent for corporations , 14 . 5 percent for individuals . no payroll tax for the employee . the business tax pays for social security , and there would be two remaining deductions home mortgage and charity . 
rubio . . . oh , excuse me inaudible . . . 
rubio all right , i'm going to finish my statement here . 
trump wrong . wrong . 
trump they were wrong . 
kasich you know , john , i think all people are the same . look , i did 106 town halls , and i've been doing them left and right here in south carolina . the first thing we have to do is grow the economy , and i know the formula because i was chairman in washington when we balanced the budget and created so many jobs , and the same that we've been able to do in ohio . you need common sense regulations so small business can flourish , you need lower taxes both on business and individuals , and you need a fiscal plan to be able to get ourselves in a situation where people can predict a little bit about the future when it comes to the fiscal issues . and when you have that formula , combined with work force that's trained , you can explode the economy and create many jobs . i have done it twice , and i want to go back to washington and do it again . john , the thing is , is i think that there are people now , these blue collar democrats my dad was a blue collar democrat the democratic party has left them . when they're arguing about being socialists , they've left they have lost those blue collar democrats . and you know what i think they get out of me is my sense of what they get out of me , and it's embarrassment about campaigns , you brag about yourself . but i think i'm a uniter , i think people sense it . i think they know i have the experience , and that i'm a man that can give people hope and a sense that they have the opportunity rise . and i'll tell you , i love these blue collar democrats , because they're going to vote for us come next fall , promise you that . 
paul . . . i think deserves a little more attention . 
bush look , the the deal is already done . the biggest tax increase happened under the watch of barack obama , and spending's gone up . you find a democrat that's for cutting taxes cutting spending ten dollars , i'll give them a warm kiss . laughter 
trump go ahead . crosstalk 
trump am i talking or are you talking , jeb ? 
cruz but you called for bush to be impeached . 
walker . . . that will ensure they repeal obamacare . . . 
christie you know what the shame is you know what the shame is , marco ? the shame is that you would actually criticize somebody for showing up to work , plowing the streets , getting the trains running back on time when you've never been responsible for that in your entire life . 
trump no , but it's another lie . 
huckabee because i think it is incredibly important . this is really about the survival of western civilization . this is not just a little conflict with a middle eastern country that we've just now given over 100 billion to , the equivalent in u . s . terms is 5 trillion . this threatens israel immediately , this threatens the entire middle east , but it threatens the united states of america . and we can't treat a nuclear iranian government as if it is just some government that would like to have power . this is a government for 36 years has killed americans , they kidnapped americans , they have maimed americans . they have sponsored terrorist groups , hamas and hezbollah , and they threaten the very essence of western civilization . to give them this agreement , that the president treats like the magna carta , but iranians treat it like it's toilet paper , and we must , simply , make it very clear that the next president , one of us on this stage , will absolutely not honor that agreement , and will destroy it and will be tough with iran , because otherwise , we put every person in this world in a very dangerous place . 
cruz well , listen , unlike donald , i would not support banning firearms . in that instance , bill clinton banned many of the most popular firearms in america . and by the way , the study showed that ban did nothing to reduce violent crime . it just took away the second amendment rights of law abiding citizens . and let me point out , you know , it is easy for political candidates to have rhetoric and say , i support the second amendment . but you cannot say that and at the same time say what donald just said , which is that on the question of supreme court nominees he wants to compromise and reach a middle ground with harry reid and chuck schumer . that's what he said in the last debate . 
rubio dana , may i interject here ? 
trump . . . i hope you think inaudible . . . 
rubio i would say to him that there is no law that they want us to pass that would have any impact on that . if we pass if you took the gift list of all of these groups that are asking us to pass these laws and did every single one of them , there would be no change in our environment . sea level would still rise . all these other things that are happening would continue to go on for a lot of different reasons . one , because america is not a planet . it's a country . and number two , because these other countries like india and china are more than making up in carbon emissions for whatever we could possibly cut . here's what he will immediately and mayor regalado is a great mayor and a good friend but here's what he's going to immediately going to start hearing from . he will immediately start hearing from families in south florida who are barely making it by , and now their electric bill went up 20 or 30 a month because we just made it more expensive to generate power . that cost will be passed on to working families . i am not going to destroy the u . s . economy for a law that will do nothing for our environent . 
christie she is , and so if she , based on conscience , can't sign that that marriage license , then there should be someone in her office to be able to do it , and if the law needs to be changed in the state of kentucky , which is what she's advocating , it should be changed . 
paul absolutely . and i think that we ought to look where income inequality seems to be the worst . it seems to be worst in cities run by democrats , governors of . . . states run by democrats and countries currently run by democrats . so the thing is , let's look for root causes . but i would also say lay some blame at the the feet of the federal reserve . i think the federal reserve has made this problem worse . by artificially keeping interest rates below the market rate , average ordinary citizens have a tough time earning interest , have a tough time making money . they're actually talking now about negative interest . the money as it's created through quantitative easing or other means tends to start out in the big banks in new york . and because we're now paying interest for them to keep the money there , much of that money has not filtered out into the economy . so what we're finding is there is increasing income disparity and income inequality . we also find that as the federal reserve destroys the value of the currency , what you're finding is that , if you're poor , if you make 20 , 000 a year and you have three or four kids , and you're trying to get by , as your prices rise or as the value of the dollar shrinks , these are the people that are hurt the worst . so really we need to reexamine whether we not we want a federal reserve that's involved so much in determining interest rates . we also need to look at root causes as to what caused the housing boom and the housing collapse . but the bottom line is , if you want less income inequality , move to a city with a republican mayor or a state with a republican governor . 
fiorina . . . that we have information to shop wisely for our health care . 
paul he's referred to me . . . 
walker it's true . 
carson well , let me put it this way , there has there have been numerous studies , and they have not demonstrated that there is any correlation between vaccinations and autism . this was something that was spread widely 15 or 20 years ago , and it has not been adequately , you know , revealed to the public what's actually going on . vaccines are very important . certain ones . the ones that would prevent death or crippling . there are others , there are a multitude of vaccines which probably don't fit in that category , and there should be some discretion in those cases . but , you know , a lot of this is is is pushed by big government . and i think that's one of the things that people so vehemently want to get rid of , big government . you know , we have 4 . 1 million federal employees . six hundred and fifty federal agencies and department sic . that's why they have to take so much of our taxes . 
huckabee the government ought to wear a striped shirt and just make sure the game . . . 
christie . . . i'm going to go to washington to stop it . . . 
trump jeb , just . . . 
huckabee we need to be focusing on what fixes this country . and i'll tell you one thing that we never talk about we haven't talked about it tonight . why aren't we talking about instead of cutting benefits for old people , cutting benefits for sick people why don't we say , let's cure the four big cost driving diseases . . . 
trump well look , he was a failed candidate , he should have beaten president obama very easy . he failed miserably , and it was an embarrassment to everybody , including the republican party . it looked like he went away on a vacation the last month . so , i don't take that , and i guess , obviously , he wants to be relevant . he wants to be back in the game . as far as domestic policy and trade which is killing our country , he said free trade and i believe in free trade also . but , if you look at china , and you look japan , and if you look at mexico , both at the border , by the way , where they're killing us . both at the border , and with trade and every other country we do business with we are getting absolutely crushed on trade . and , he said free trade , i say free trade great . but , not when they're beating us so badly . with china we're going to lose 505 billion dollars in terms of trades . you just can't do it . mexico , 58 billion dollars . japan , probably about , they don't know it yet , but about 109 billion dollars . every country we lose money with . as far as i'm concerned , we've got to reduce we have to redo our trade deals 100 percent . i have the greatest business people in the world lined up to do it . we will make . . . bell ringing . . . great trade deals . cheering 
rubio . . . to go to trump university , and they're suing now 36 , 000 to go to a university . . . 
bush the difference the difference between eminent domain for public purpose as donald said , roads and infrastructure , pipelines and all that that's for public purpose . but what donald trump did was use eminent domain to try to take the property of an elderly woman on the strip in atlantic city . that is not public purpose , that is down right wrong . and here's the problem with that . the problem was , it was to tear down it was to tear down it was to tear down the house . . . 
christie so , let's stop fooling around about this , let's tell people the truth . for once , let's do that , and stop trying to give them some kind of fantasy that's never going to come true . 
christie martha ? 
bush this is not about my family or his family . this is about the south carolina families that need someone to be a commander in chief that can lead . i'm that person . 
trump well , let me just say this . i've gotten to know marco over a period of time , believe me , he is not a leader . believe me . 
bush i think the voters will make that determination . but what i know to be true is that the next president of the united states is going to have to fix an extraordinary difficult situation . this administration , with president obama and hillary clinton , has created insecurity the likes of which we never would've imagined . there's not a place in the world where we're better off today than six and a half years ago . and that requires a steadiness . that requires an understanding of how the world works . that requires an understanding and appreciation of american leadership in the world . you can't just , you know , talk about this stuff and insult leaders around the world and expect a good result . you have to do this with a steady hand , and i believe i have those skills . 
kasich no , i wouldn't . and but that doesn't matter when it comes to the issue of preexisting conditions . you don't want any american to lose their house , everything they've saved , because they get sick . now , i think it is more complicated than what we've heard here tonight . we're actually running significant health reform in my state . i would repeal obamacare for a variety of reasons . i would take some of the federal resources , combine it with the freed up medicaid program , which i would send back to the states , and cover the people who are currently the working poor because we don't want to have tens of millions of americans losing their health insurance . and then we're driving towards total transparency . if any of you here ever get a hospital bill , it's easier to interpret the dead sea scrolls than to understand your hospital bill . the fact is what we need is transparency with hospitals and with the providers . and i'll tell you what we will do . we are actually going to make payments to physicians and to hospitals who actually deliver healthcare with great quality at low prices . we actually are going to make the market work . 
trump and the middle east became totally destabilized . so i just want to say . as far as single payer , it works in canada . it works incredibly well in scotland . it could have worked in a different age , which is the age you're talking about here . what i'd like to see is a private system without the artificial lines around every state . i have a big company with thousands and thousands of employees . and if i'm negotiating in new york or in new jersey or in california , i have like one bidder . nobody can bid . you know why ? because the insurance companies are making a fortune because they have control of the politicians , of course , with the exception of the politicians on this stage . but they have total control of the politicians . they're making a fortune . get rid of the artificial lines and you will have . . . timer sounds . . . yourself great plans . and then we have to take care of the people that can't take care of themselves . and i will do that through a different system . crosstalk 
rubio thank you for that question . i would begin by saying that i'm not sure it's a weakness , but i do believe that i share a sense of optimism for america's future that , today , is eroding from too many of our people . i think there's a sense in this country today that somehow our best days are behind us . and that doesn't have to be true . our greatest days lie ahead if we are willing to do what it takes now . if we're willing to do what it takes now , the 21st century is going to be the new american century , greater than any other era we've had in the history of this great nation . 
bush . . . well , the draft's not going to be reinstituted , but why if women are accessing . . . 
kasich . . . i think you were coming to me and then . . . 
rubio this is so typical . 
fiorina well , this is one of the reasons why tom perkins and i had disagreements in the boardroom , becky . laughter nevertheless , one of the things that i think people don't always understand is how accountable a ceo actually is . so you know , i had to report results every 90 days in excruciating detail . i had to answer every single question about every single result and every single projection in public until there were no more questions . and if i misrepresented those results or those projections in any way , i was held criminally liable . imagine imagine if a politician were held to that standard of account . i will run on my record all day long . and i believe people need a leader who is prepared to make tough calls in tough times and stand up . . . 
cruz you know , flexibility is a good thing , but it shouldn't you shouldn't be flexible on core principles . i like donald , he is an amazing entertainer , but his policies for most of his life . . . 
cruz chris , absolutely yes . and not only will i support it . . . . . . i have authored kate's law in the united states senate and filed that legislation . i tried to get the senate to vote to pass kate's law on the floor of the senate just one week ago , and the leader of our own party blocked a vote on kate's law . you know , there was reference made to our leaders being stupid . it's not a question of stupidity . it's that they don't want to enforce the immigration laws . that there are far too many in the washington cartel that support amnesty . president obama has talked about fundamentally transforming this country . there's 7 billion people across the face of the globe , many of whom want to come to this country . if they come legally , great . but if they come illegally and they get amnesty , that is how we fundamentally change this country , and it really is striking . a majority of the candidates on this stage have supported amnesty . i have never supported amnesty , and i led the fight against chuck schumer's gang of eight amnesty legislation in the senate . 
trump 
trump i will . don't worry about it , marco . don't worry about it . don't worry about it little marco , i will . 
paul well , let's be clear , i'm the only one on the stage who actually has a five year budget that balances . i've put pencil to paper . . . 
bush well , i'm surprised senator cruz would say that since he was as strong supporter of john roberts at the time . i will talk about what i will do as it relates to appointing supreme court justices . we need to make sure that we have justices that , with a proven experienced record of respect for upholding the constitution . that is what we need . we can't have the history in recent past is appoint people that have no experience so that you can't get attacked . and , that makes it harder for people to have confidence that they won't veer off . . . 
walker so , the best way to help people see their wages go up is to get them the education , the skill they need , to take on careers that pay more than minimum wage . and , it's why we talk about it , it's all about jobs . you want to help actually get jobs , it's why on that last question we were trying to jump in on taxes . to me , it's not just about taxes , cutting taxes . i've done it as much as anyone has . i've cut income taxes , i've cut property taxes . in fact , property taxes are lower today in my state than they were before we took office . the real issues about jobs . ronald reagan , our plan is based on the ronald reagan tax cuts of 1986 . that brought about one of the longest sustained periods of economic growth in american history . all the things we should be talking about tonight are about how do we create jobs , helping people get the skills and the education qualifications they need to succeed . that's the way you help people create jobs . it's part of our large plan to reform the tax code , to cut taxes , to put in place an education system that gives people the skills and education that they need . to put in place all the above energy policy , but you start on day one with repealing obamacare . i'm the only one on this stage that's actually got a plan , introduced an actual plan to repeal obamacare on day one . i'll send a bill up to congress , and to make sure enact it . . . 
rubio megyn , this is why this is relevant to this election . 
kasich well , i agree that we should defund planned parenthood . i don't know many people in america who don't think that we should , and in my state , we're trying to figure out how to get it done , because we are threatened with the federal government taking all of our medicaid money away . i think there is a way to get this done by giving governors the ability to be able to act to defund planned parenthood . but when ph it comes to closing down the federal government , you gotta be very careful about that . when we shut the government down if we have a chance at success and it's a great principle , yes . the president of the united states is not going to sign this , and all we're gonna do is shut the government down , and then we're gonna open up open it up , and the american people are gonna shake their heads and say , what's the story with these republicans ? so i think there is a way to get to cutting off the funding for planned parenthood . i was in the congress for 18 years , balanced the budget , cut taxes , got it done . changed welfare , went around the president to get welfare reform done . there are ways to do it without having to shut the government down , but i'm sympathetic to the fact that we don't want this organization to get funding , and the money ought to be reprogrammed for family planning in other organizations that don't support this tactic . but i would not be for shutting the government down . . . 
christie thank you wolf . america has been betrayed . we've been betrayed by the leadership that barack obama and hilary clinton have provided to this country over the last number of years . think about just what's happened today . the second largest school district in america in los angeles closed based on a threat . think about the effect that , that's going to have on those children when they go back to school tomorrow wondering filled with anxiety to whether they're really going to be safe . think about the mothers who will take those children tomorrow morning to the bus stop wondering whether their children will arrive back on that bus safe and sound . think about the fathers of los angeles , who tomorrow will head off to work and wonder about the safety of their wives and their children . what is barack obama and hillary clinton done to this country ? that the most basic responsibility of an administration is to protect the safety and security of the american people . i will tell you this , i'm a former federal prosecutor , i've fought terrorists and won and when we get back in the white house we will fight terrorists and win again and america will be safe . 
carson can i correct . . . 
christie yeah , sure . and , i don't disagree with ending congress' retirement program . i'm a governor , i don't have a retirement program in my state , and i don't disagree with that . but , here's the news to the american people , he's complaining about the lying and stealing . the lying and stealing has already occurred . the trust fund is filled with iou's . we can't fix the problem just by ending congress's retirement , that's worth about , this much . we need to go at the fundamental problem , and the fundamental problem is that this system is broken . it has been stolen from . we have been lied to , timer sounds and we need a strong leader to tell the truth and fix . . . 
bush i completely agree with chris . and this administration has been so lax . think about it . hillary clinton is using a private server for where classified information go by . this is a this is a serious administration ? the president receives an inspector general's report that the office of personnel management could be hacked into ; they had antiquated firewalls ; 23 million files have been are in the hands of the chinese allegedly , including , by the way , members of the press , it turns out , last week . maybe that's the only part that's good news , so that you guys can get a feel for what it's like now to see this type of attack . this is something we have to have the best defensive capabilities . we need to coordinate all of our efforts with the private sector . we need to give them liability relief so that we can do that . and offensively , we need to have capabilities second to none . we need to create a situation where they know that there will be adverse impacts if they continue to do what they're doing . they'll respect that . they'll respect a united states that is serious about protecting our our infrastructure . if we don't do it , we'll continue to see what's exactly what's happening , not just from the chinese , by the way . the russians and rogue actors , including isis this is a serious part of the 21st century security challenge that we face . 
bush . . . i do , and i do think that we should not impose any kind of political agenda on the military . there should be if women can meet the requirements , the minimum requirements for combat service they ought to have the right to do it . for sure . it ought to be focused on the morale as well . we got to make sure that we have readiness much higher than we do today . we need to eliminate the sequester which is devastating our military . we can't be focusing on the political side of this , we need to realize that our military force is how we project our word in the world . when we're weak militarily it doesn't matter what we say . we can talk about red lines , and isis being the j . v . team , and reset buttons and all this . if we don't have a strong military than no one fears us , and they take actions that are against our national interest . 
kasich that's what we're doing in our state . 
rubio all right , well , let's hear it big donald . 
cruz well , he he has attempted to muddy the waters , but i think that anyone who watched the battle that we had . you know , there was a time for choosing as reagan put it . where there was a battle over amnesty and some chose , like senator rubio to stand with barack obama and chuck schumer and support a massive amnesty plan . others chose to stand with jeff sessions and steve king and the american people and secure the border . and let me mention , this issue is actually directly connected to what we've been talking about . because the front line with isis isn't just in iraq and syria , it's in kennedy airport and the rio grande . border security is national security . and , you know , one of the most troubling aspects of the rubio schumer gang of eight bill was that it gave president obama blanket authority to admit refugees , including syrian refugees without mandating any background checks whatsoever . now we've seen what happened in san bernardino . when you are letting people in , when the fbi can't vet them , it puts american citizens at risk . and i tell you , if i'm elected president , we will secure the border . we will triple the border patrol . we will build a wall that works and i'll get donald trump to pay for it . 
cruz no , of course not . we've never targeted innocent civilians and we're not going to start now . but listen , jake , i understand . people are scared and for seven years , we've faced terrorist attacks and president obama lectures americans on islamophobia . that is maddening . but the answer is not simply to yell , china bad , muslims bad . you've got to understand the nature of the threats we're facing and how you deal with them . and yes , it is true there are millions of radical islamic terrorists who seek to kill us . we need a president , commander in chief focused on fighting them . and i'll tell you , frankly one concern i have with donald is that although his language is quite incendiary , when you look at his substantive policies on iran , he has said he would not rip up this iranian nuclear deal . i think that's a mistake . the ayatollah khomeini wants nuclear weapons to murder us . i'll give you another example , dealing with islamic radical terrorism . on israel , donald has said he wants to be neutral between israel and the palestinians . as president , i will not be neutral . and let me say this week , a texan , taylor force . he was an eagle scout , he was a west point graduate , he was an army veteran . he was murdered by a palestinian terrorist this week in israel , and i don't think we need a commander in chief . . . bell rings . . . who is neutral between the palestinian terrorists and one of our strongest allies in the world , the nation of israel . 
rubio but on this point , if i may add something on this point . we are all frustrated with what china is doing . i think we need to be very careful with tariffs , and here's why . china doesn't pay the tariff , the buyer pays the tariff . if you send a tie or a shirt made in china into the united states and an american goes to buy it at the store and there's a tariff on it , it gets passed on in the price to price to the consumer . so i think the better approach , the best thing we can do to protect ourselves against china economically is to make our economy stronger , which means reversing course from all the damage barack obama is doing to this economy . it begins with tax reform . let's not have the most expensive business tax rate in the world . let's allow companies to immediately expense . it continues with regulatory reform . regulations in this country are out of control , especially the employment prevention agency , the epa , and all of the rules they continue to impose on our economy and hurting us . how about obamacare , a certified job killer ? it needs to be repealed and replaced . and we need to bring our debt under control , make our economy stronger . that is the way to deal with china at the end of the day . 
trump . . . in one poll . . . 
rubio the individual mandate . he said he likes the individual mandate portion of it , which i don't believe that should be part of it . that should not remain there . i think here's what we need to replace it with . we need to repeal obamacare completely and replace it with a system that puts americans in charge of their health care money again . if your employer wants to buy health insurance for you , they can continue to do so from any company in america they want to buy it from . otherwise , your employers can provide you health care money , tax free , not treated as income , and you can use that money only for health care , but you can use it to fund health care any way you want , fully fund a health savings account , the combination of a health savings account or a private plan from any company in any state in the country . and if you don't have that , then you will have a refundable tax credit that provides you health care money to buy your own health care coverage . and that , i think , is a much better approach than obamacare , which , by the way , isn't just bad for health care , it's bad for our economy . it is a health care law that is basically forcing companies to lay people off , cut people's hours , move people to part time . it is not just a bad health care law , it is a job killing law . and i will repeal it as president and we will replace it with something substantially better for all americans . 
trump . . . again , there will be a lot of advertising . it's the only thing that might save him . but i doubt it . 
rubio would you rule it out ? 
carson if hillary is the candidate , which i doubt , that would be a dream come true . laughter but you know , the fact of the matter is , she is the epitome of the progressive the secular progressive movement . and she counts on the fact that people are uninformed , the alinsky model , taking advantage of useful idiots . well , i just happen to believe that people are not stupid . and the way i will come at it is to educate people , help people to actually understand that it is that progressive movement that is causing them the problems . you know , you look at the the national debt and how it's being driven up . if i was trying to destroy this country , what i would do is find a way to drive wedges between all the people , drive the debt to an unsustainable level , and then step off the stage as a world leader and let our enemies increase while we decreased our capacity as a military person . and that's what she's doing . 
trump that is not what you said in the op ed . 
trump carolina . 
trump and we had a legitimate misunderstanding in terms of his pronunciation of a word . but i would say just . . . laughter 
rubio can i just add what he's right on point there . do you know why these banks are so big ? the government made them big . the government made them big by adding thousands and thousands of pages of regulations . so the big banks , they have an army of lawyers , they have an army of compliance officers . they can deal with all these things . the small banks , like governor bush was saying , they can't deal with all these regulations . they can't deal with all they cannot hire the fanciest law firm in washington or the best lobbying firm to deal with all these regulations . and so the result is , the big banks get bigger , the small banks struggle to lend or even exist , and the result is what you have today . and in dodd frank , you have actually codified too big to fail . we have actually created a category of systemically important institutions , and these banks go around bragging about it . you know what they say to people with a wink and a nod ? we are so big , we are so important that if we get in trouble , the government has to bail us out . this is an outrage . we need to repeal dodd frank as soon as possible . 
rubio yes , i would just say a couple of things . there is no doubt that donald has done well in these elections . there is no doubt about that . the numbers are there . here is what the numbers also say . two thirds of the people who have cast a vote in a republican primary or caucus have voted against you . they do not want you to be our nominee . and , the reason why is because we are not going to turn over the conservative movement , or the party of lincoln or reagan , for example , to someone whose positions are not conservative . to someone who last week defended planned parenthood for 30 seconds a debate stage . to someone , for example , that has no ideas on foreign someone who thinks the nuclear triad is a rock band from the 1980's . 
trump i stood yesterday with 75 construction workers . they're tough , they're strong , they're great people . half of them had tears pouring down their face . they were watching the humiliation of our young ten sailors , sitting on the floor with their knees in a begging position , their hands up . and iranian wise guys having guns to their heads . it was a terrible sight . a terrible sight . and the only reason we got them back is because we owed them with a stupid deal , 150 billion . if i'm president , there won't be stupid deals anymore . we will make america great again . we will win on everything we do . thank you . 
trump no , i'm a big defender of the second amendment . and if you look at what's happened , whether it's in california , where you had the 14 people killed , whether it's in paris which , by the way , has the toughest gun laws in the world and 130 people killed . many , many people in the hospital gravely injured . they will be dying . many people will be dying in addition . if we had guns , or if they had guns on the other side of the room , with the bullets going in the opposite direction , you would not have had 130 people killed . that i can tell you right now . so i'm a very , very big supporter of the second amendment . 
fiorina . . . he walked away , he quit talks . . . 
trump number one . number two , i currently employ thousands of hispanics , and over the years , i've employed tens of thousands of hispanics . they're incredible people . they know , and the reason i won in nevada , not only won the big one , but i also won subs , like , as an example , i won with women . i won with every single category . i won with men , i won with high income , low income , i won with hispanics . and i got 46 percent . nobody else was close . because they know i'm going to bring jobs back from china , from japan , from so many other places . they get it . they're incredible people . they're incredible workers . they get it . and i've won many of the polls with hispanics . i didn't maybe win the telemundo poll . but one thing i'm also going to do , i'm going to be getting bringing a lot of people in who are democrats , who are independents , and you're seeing that with the polls , because if you look at anywhere , look at any of the elections , every single election , it has been record setting . and the good news is , for the republican party , the democrats are getting very poor numbers in terms of bringing them in . we're getting record setting numbers . i think i have something to do with that . we're getting record setting numbers . and i won every one the three of them that i won , i won with record setting numbers . 
fiorina i would just say that . . . laughter . . . i would just say this , we've heard a lot of great ideas up here , and i agree with what senator rubio said . every election we talk about this . every election we talk about medicare and social security reform . it never happens . i would like to start with a basic . let us actually go to zero based budgeting so we know where the money is being spent . it's kind of basic . there is a bill sitting in the house that would actually pass and have us go to zero based budgeting so we know where every dime of your money is being spent instead of only talking about how much more we're going to spend year after year after year . my point is this . while there are lots of good ideas for reform , we have never tackled the basics . and we finally need to tackle the basics to cut this government down to size and hold it accountable . so let's start by knowing where your money is being spent by the federal government . 
trump but you wouldn't know anything about it because you're a lousy businessman . 
cruz so , in terms of a practical solution , i've laid out the most detailed plan for solving illegal immigration . it's 11 pages , single spaced , chapter and verse . it's on our website , tedcruz . org . in short , we're going to do , we're going to build a wall . we're going to triple the border patrol . we're going to increase and actually , since donald enjoyed that , i will simply say , i've got somebody in mind to build it . we're going to increase four fold , the fixed wing and rotary wing aircraft , so that you have technology monitoring an attempted incursion to direct the boots on the ground where they're occurring . we're going to put in place a strong e verify system in the workplace , so you can't get a job without proving you are here legally . we'll put in place a biometric exit entry system on visas , because 40 percent of illegal immigration comes not over the border illegally , but people coming on visas and overstaying . we will end sanctuary cities by cutting off taxpayer dollars to any jurisdiction that defies federal immigration law . and we will end welfare benefits for those here illegally . 
trump inaudible 
trump . . . my language . give me a break . . . 
rubio the issue is a dramatically different issue than it was 24 months ago . twenty four months ago , 36 months ago , you did not have a group of radical crazies named isis who were burning people in cages and recruiting people to enter our country legally . they have a sophisticated understanding of our legal immigration system and we now have an obligation to ensure that they are not able to use that system against us . the entire system of legal immigration must now be reexamined for security first and foremost , with an eye on isis . because they're recruiting people to enter this country as engineers , posing as doctors , posing as refugees . we know this for a fact . they've contacted the trafficking networks in the western hemisphere to get people in through the southern border . and they got a killer in san bernardino in posing as a fiance . this issue now has to be about stopping isis entering the united states , and when i'm president we will . 
rubio i never get to addressed , and . . . 
cruz . . . and i will as president as well . 
rubio well , first , we need to understand who they are . isis is not just a jihadist group , they're an apocalyptic group . they want to trigger a showdown in a city named tibet between the west and themselves which they believe will trigger the arrival of their messianic figure . and i'm not saying that's what's going to happen . the reason why it's important to understand that is because these are not groups that are just going to go away on their own . they are going to have to be defeated . and i believe they need to be defeated on the ground , by a ground force , made up primarily of sunni arabs . it will take sunni arabs to reject them ideologically and defeat them militarily . that will require a coalition of iraqis and syrians , that are also sunnis , but it will also require the cooperation of jordanians , egyptians . we should ask more of the saudis . that will need to be backed up with more u . s . special operation forces alongside them . and it will have to be backed up with increased air strikes . and we are going to have to strike them , not just in iraq and in syria , but in every other part of the world where they have now created hubs of operation . they have affiliates in over a dozen countries across this planet . they have a sophisticated network of radicalizing people here in the homeland and around the world . bell rings but it all begins by taking away their their safe operating spaces with a ground force that a u . s . led coalition takes on . 
cruz so let's start let's start with immigration . let's start with immigration and have a little bit of clarity . marco stood with chuck schumer and barack obama on amnesty . i stood with jeff sessions and steve king . marco stood today , standing on this stage marco supports legalization and citizenship for 12 million illegals . i opposed and oppose legalization and citizenship . and by the way , the attack he keeps throwing out on the military budget , marco knows full well i voted for his amendment to increase military spending to 697 billion . what he said , and he said it in the last , it's simply not true . and as president , i will rebuild the military and keep this country safe . 
trump first of all . . . 
bush the leadership of ronald reagan and my . . . crosstalk 
rubio hold on , a second , jake , he asked me , as well . i'd like to actually . . . 
trump first of all , jeb , i am very happy that you denied that , and i appreciate that very much . he is a true gentleman . he really is . one thing he did say , and i mean that . the one thing he did say about me , however , was my tone . and i also understand that . but when you have people that are cutting christians' heads off , when you have a world that the border and at so many places , that it is medieval times , we've never it almost has to be as bad as it ever was in terms of the violence and the horror , we don't have time for tone . timer sounds we have to go out and get the job done . 
fiorina . . . jake , inaudible . . . 
rubio well , i am going to answer your question , neil . he is this president is undermining the constitutional basis of this government . this president is undermining our military . he is undermining our standing in the world . i like chris christie , but we can not afford to have a president of the united states that supports common core . we can not afford to have a president of the united states that supports gun control . this president , this president is more interested in funding less interested in funding the military , than he is in funding planned he's more interested in funding planned parenthood than he is in funding the military . chris christie wrote a check to planned parenthood . all i'm saying is our next president has to be someone that undoes the damage barack obama has done to this country . it can not be someone that agrees with his agenda . because the damage he has done to america is extraordinary . let me tell you , if we don't get this election right , there may be no turning back for america . we're on the verge of being the first generation of americans that leave our children worse off than ourselves . so i just truly , with all my heart belief , i like everybody on the stage . no one is a socialist . no one here is under fbi investigation . so we have a good group of people . 
christie i turned 18 in 1980 , and my first vote was for ronald reagan . boy , am i glad i did it . and i think the country is , too . a christie presidency won't be about me . it will be about you . tonight , you sit at home in your living room , frustrated that you play by the rules , you pay the taxes , you do the hard things to raise your family , yet you feel like america's generosity is being taken advantage of . that you've been system is being gamed , and that you're turning out to fall further and further behind . our presidency our presidency will be about ending that , about enforcing the law , level the playing field for everybody , and once again reward those folks who play by the rules , and think that justice means more than just the word . but it means a way of life . and i will tell you this , around the world , i will not shake hands with , i will not meet with , and i will not agree to anything with a country that says death to us and death to israel and holds our hostages while we sign agreements with them . it will be an america that be strong and resolute , and will once again be able to stick out its chest and say , we truly are the greatest nation in the world , because we live our lives that way , each and every day . 
trump no , there's nothing to add . cheering and applause what is to add ? 
bush yeah . . . 
cruz actually , i'd love to get you to build a wall . crosstalk 
bush you're never going to be president of the united states by insulting your way to the presidency . 
bush . . . this is a man who insults his way to the nomination . . . 
cruz thank you , wolf . america is at war . our enemy is not violent extremism . it is not some unnamed malevolent force . it is radical islamic terrorist . we have a president who is unwilling to utter its name . the men and women on this stage , every one of us , is better prepared to keep this nation safe than is barack obama or hillary clinton . we need a president who understands the first obligation of the commander in chief is to keep america safe . if i am elected president , we will hunt down and kill the terrorists . we will utterly destroy isis . we will stop the terrorist attacks before they occur because we will not be prisoners to political correctness . rather , we will speak the truth . border security is national security and we will not be admitting jihadists as refugees . we will keep america safe . 
kasich . . . because if during well , i'll tell you what ph . 
bush well , i've been speaking english here tonight , and i'll keep speaking english . but the simple fact is , if a high school kid asks me a question in spanish , a school by the way , a voucher program that was created under my watch , the largest voucher program in the country , where kids can go to a christian school , and they ask me a question in spanish , i'm going to show respect and answer that question in spanish . even though they do speak english , and even though they embrace american values . 
bush chris , why don't you mention my name so i can get into this . 
bush i'm gonna fight as hard as i can to make sure that we shift power away from washington , simplify the tax code , to spur economic activity in this country . of course it's the highest priority . if we don't do that , we're stuck with the new normal of 2 percent growth . hillary clinton says , basically , we just gotta get used to it . two percent growth means declining income for the middle class . it means more than 6 million people are stuck in poverty than the day that barack obama was inaugurated . it means it means more demands on government growing the economy is the first job , if we're going to be serious about dealing with the deficit and debt . and more importantly , people are really struggling right now . in this economy , the disposable income of the great middle is down 2 , 300 bucks . so yeah , we've created jobs , your argue ph brought that up early , and it was a good question . jobs are being created , but they're lower income jobs than the jobs that were lost . and the net effect of this is we need to jump start the economy . i think of jonathan ph and reagan love ph , who are supporters of mine . jonathan has been deployed by the national guard , he is he's in oklahoma . reagan love by the way , pretty great name , i think is a teacher . when if they had this tax cut , what they told me was that that 2 , 300 of money in their pocket they would go back to south carolina and start a business . imagine what it would be like , instead of having more businesses closed than started , we had it the exact opposite . we would grow our economy , and the government would get the revenue necessary to make things make things better . hillary clinton's approach to this is more top down , more regulation , more taxes , more government , and it will destroy our economy . 
bush could i could i bring something up here , because i'm a constituent of the senator and i helped him and i expected that he would do constituent service , which means that he shows up to work . he got endorsed by the sun sentinel because he was the most talented guy in the field . he's a gifted politician . but marco , when you signed up for this , this was a six year term , and you should be showing up to work . i mean , literally , the senate what is it , like a french work week ? you get , like , three days where you have to show up ? you can campaign , or just resign and let someone else take the job . there are a lot of people living paycheck to paycheck in florida as well , they're looking for a senator that will fight for them each and every day . 
trump i criticized mitt romney for losing the election . he should have won that election . he had a failed president . he ran a terrible campaign . he was a terrible candidate . that's what i criticize mitt romney i mean , ran . . . 
rubio . . . prove to people that illegal immigration is under control . 
huckabee it seems like this election has been a whole lot about a person who's very high in the polls , that doesn't have a clue about how to govern . a person who has been filled with scandals , and who could not lead , and , of course , i'm talking about hillary clinton . laughter i think america . . . 
bush doesn't matter . doesn't matter . 
rubio that's a great question . first of all , it begins by having leaders that recognize that the economy we live in today is dramatically different from the one we had five years ago . it's an economy that now has placed us in global competition with dozens of other countries around the world . now , the big companies that have connections with washington , they can affect policies to help them , but the small companies like the one tania is talking about , they're the ones that are struggling . the first thing we need to do is we need to even out the tax code for small businesses so that we lower their tax rate to 25 percent , just as we need to lower it for all businesses . we need to have a regulatory budget in america that limits the amount of regulations on our economy . we need to repeal and replace obamacare and we need to improve higher education so that people can have access to the skills they need for 21st century jobs . and last but not least , we need to repeal dodd frank . it is eviscerating small businesses and small banks . 20 over 40 percent of small and mid size banks that loan money to small businesses have been wiped out over the since dodd frank has passed . we need to repeal and replace dodd frank . we need to make america fair again for all businesses , but especially those being run by small business owners . 
trump i never filed for bankruptcy . 
trump i have to say , he lied this time . he lied . 100 percent . 100 percent . 
trump our country doesn't win anymore . we don't win on trade . we don't win on the military . we can't defeat isis . we're not taking care of our great people , the veterans . we're not taking care of them . we have to change our whole way , our health care system is a disaster . it's going to implode in 2017 , just like you're sitting there . it doesn't work . nothing works in our country . if i'm elected president , we will win again . we will win a lot . and we're going to have a great , great country , greater than ever before . thank you . 
carson hi , i'm ben carson , and i'm a retired pediatric neurosurgeon . i'm here with my wife , candy , of 40 years , and two of my sons , and their wives . i stress the pediatric part of my career because the reason that i've gotten involved in this race is because i'm very concerned about the future of our children , and the direction of our country is one that does not portend well , unless we , the people , intervene and retake our rightful place at the pinnacle . 
cruz our focus needs to be on keeping this country safe . 
rubio well , first of all , i think , as we've seen throughout this campaign , donald has not shown a seriousness about the issues of foreign policy . he just simply hasn't . whether it was the structure of our military , even today he was asked a question about the issue of commanders not following his lead on killing the family of terrorists . and his answer basically was , if i tell them to do it , they're going to do it . now that's just not true . foreign policy is not only consequential , i think much of our future now depends on it . you know , i see a lot of young people at my events around the country . i feel great when they come . and i always them that despite the hardships of the moment , i honestly believe that today's millennials have a chance to be the greatest generation we've had in 100 years . i really do . because the world today has hundreds of millions of people that can afford to be their clients , their customers , their partners , people they collaborate with . but that won't happen if the world is dangerous and it's unstable . and that will require strong american leadership . the next president of the united states is going to have eight years of a mess of a foreign policy to clean up . that's why it can't be hillary clinton . and quite frankly , that's why it can't be someone who simply has not shown the intellectual curiosity or the interest in learning about these very complicated issues . and donald simply hasn't . 
kasich you know , in our country , there are a lot of people who feel as though they just don't have the power . you know , they feel like if they don't have a lobbyist , if they're not wealthy , that somehow they don't get to play . but all of my career , you know , having been raised in by a mailman father whose father was a coal miner , who died of black lung and was losing his eyesight ; or a mother whose mother could barely speak english . you see , all of my career , i've fought about giving voice to the people that i grew up with and voice to the people that elected me . whether it's welfare reform and getting something back for the hard earned taxpayers ; whether it's engaging in pentagon reform and taking on the big contractors that were charging thousands of dollars for hammers and screw drivers and ripping us off ; or whether it's taking on the special interests in the nursing home industry in ohio , so that mom and dad can have the ability to stay in their own home , rather than being forced into a nursing home . look , that's who i stand up for . that's who's in my mind . . . bell rings . . . and if you really want to believe that you can get your voice back , i will tell you , as i have all my career , i will continue to fight for you , because you're the ones that built this country , and will carry it into the future . thank you . 
trump yeah , yeah , i know , you're an adult . 
christie well , i know ben wasn't talking about me , i'm sure he was talking about one of the other guys , not me . laughter as far as being an outsider is concerned as far as being an outsider is concerned , let me tell you this , jake , i'm a republican in new jersey . i wake up every morning as an outsider . i wake up every morning with a democratic legislature who trying to beat my head in and fight me because i'm trying to bring conservative change to a state that needed it desperately . and so , everyone can talk us here about their credentials . but the bottom line is , every morning i get up , i veto 400 bills from a crazy liberal democratic legislature , not one of them has been overridden . i've vetoed more tax increases than any governor in american history , according to americans for tax reform . what folks want in this country is somebody to go down there and get the job done . and that's exactly what i'll do . so , i know this much , that what the american people want to hire right now is somebody who believes in them . and believes that they are the ones who can fix our country . i will be the vessel through which they can fix this country , but it's not about me . it's about all of you . and getting this government off your back and out of your way , and letting you succeed . i know ben wasn't talking about me . 
kasich well , well , wait a minute , first of all , i didn't say i was for an increase in the federal minimum wage . i said in ohio we increased it modestly every single year . so i'm not for a federal minimum wage increase . 
rubio you know , 200 years ago , america was founded on this powerful principle that our rights don't come from government . our rights come from god . that's why we embraced free enterprise , and it made us the most prosperous people in the history of the world . that's why we embraced individual liberty , and we became the freest people ever , and the result was the american miracle . but now as i travel the country , people say what i feel . this country is changing . it feels different . we feel like we're being left behind and left out . and the reason is simple because in 2008 , we elected as president someone who wasn't interested in fixing america . we elected someone as president who wants to change america , who wants to make it more like the rest of the world . and so he undermines the constitution , and he undermines free enterprise by expanding government , and he betrays our allies and cuts deals with our enemies and guts our military . and that's why 2016 is a turning point in our history . if we elect hillary clinton , the next four years will be worse than the last eight , and our children will be the first americans ever to inherit a diminished country . but if we elect the right person if you elect me we will turn this country around , we will reclaim the american dream and this nation will be stronger and greater than it has ever been . 
paul hugh , can i can i make a response to that ? 
kasich . . . off mike inaudible first of all , i'm for sealing the border , o . k . ? and then i'm for a guest worker program . people can come in , work and go back home . we haven't closed the border because special interests , i believe , blocked it . then , we have 11 and a half million people here . if they have not committed a crime since they've been here , make them pay a fine and some back taxes , and give them a path to legalization , never to citizenship . it is not going to happen that we're going to run around and try to drag 11 and a half million people out of their homes . i'll tell you this . within the first hundred days , i will send a plan like this to the congress of the united states , and if i'm president , i'll bet you dollar to doughnuts right now , it will pass . bell rings that is a reasonable proposal that the people of this country , in my judgment , will support , and so will the bulk of the congress of the united states . 
kasich jerry , gerald , it was an attack . crosstalk 
rubio well , no , sorry . let me respond to that question . 
cruz well , maria , it's great to be with you . it's great to be here in milwaukee . you know , the question you asked really i think is the most important question any of us can have face , which is , how do we get the economy growing ? how do we bring back economic growth ? because economic growth , it's foundational to every other challenge we have . as you rightly noted , from 2008 to today , our economy has grown 1 . 2 percent a year on average . the obama economy is a disaster , and the imf is telling us this is a new normal . it doesn't have to be . if you look at the history of america , there are three levers that government has had to facilitate economic growth . the first is tax reform . and as you noted , i have rolled out a bold and simple flat tax 10 percent for every american that would produce booming growth and 4 . 9 million new jobs within a decade . the second element is regulatory reform , pulling back the armies of regulators that have descended like locusts on small businesses . and the third element is sound money . every time we've pursued all three of those whether in the 1920s with calvin coolidge or the 1960s with jfk or the 1980s with ronald reagan the result has been incredible economic growth . we have done it before , and with leadership , we can do it again . 
bush you find me a democrat you find me a democrat that will cut spending ten dollars ? heck , find me a republican in congress that would cut spending ten dollars . i'll talk to them . 
cruz who need to be trusted to govern ourselves . 
paul john , i'd like to address this ? john , could i follow up on this ? 
cruz . . . we ought to hunt down our enemies and kill isis rather than creating opportunities for isis to take control of new countries . 
paul look , i don't want my marriage or my guns registered in washington . and if people have an opinion , it's a religious opinion that is heartly felt , obviously they should be allowed to practice that and no government should interfere with them . one of the things , one of the things that really got to me was the thing in houston where you had the government , the mayor actually , trying to get the sermons of ministers . when the government tries to invade the church to enforce its own opinion on marriage , that's when it's time to resist . 
cruz you know , as a cuban , i might go with cohiba ph , and i'll tell you , i'd go with , for heidi , angel , because she is my angel . 
rubio that's not an accurate assessment of what i said about ethanol . what i said is that ethanol will phase out , it is phasing out now . by 2022 that program expires by virtue of the existing law , and at that point it will go away . i don't agree with the mandate and the program that's in place , but i think it's unfair that these people have gone out and invested all this money into this program and we're just going to yank it away from them . and , again , you read the statement in spanish . i said very clearly on spanish television , daca will have to end at some point , and that point is at that time i was not a candidate for president . i said it will end in my first day in office as president , and the people who have it now will not be able to renew it . new applicants will not be able to apply . that is the end of daca . i am sympathetic to this cause , but once again , it cannot supersede the constitution of the united states which this president habitually and routinely every single day ignores and violates . cheering and applause 
cruz bret , you know , i think the american people understand that yelling and cursing at people doesn't make you a tough guy . we need a commander in chief that , number one , will rebuild the military , just like ronald reagan did in 1981 coming out of the weak jimmy carter administration . he passed tax reform and regulatory reform . the economy took off . it generated millions in high paying jobs , trillions in new revenue . he rebuilt the military , bankrupted the soviet union , and won the cold war . as president , i will do the exact same thing with radical islamic terrorism . we will rebuild this military so that it remains the mightiest fighting force on the face of the planet . and then , when i am commander in chief , every militant on the face of the earth will understand that if they go and join isis , if they wage jihad against the united states of america , they are signing their death warrant . 
rubio yeah , a couple points . in 2013 we had never faced a crisis like the syrian refugee crisis now . up until that point , a refugee meant someone fleeing oppression , fleeing communism like it is in my community . as far as ted's record , i'm always puzzled by his attack on this issue . ted , you support legalizing people who are in this country illegally . ted cruz supported a 500 percent increase in the number of h 1 visas , the guest workers that are allowed into this country , and ted supports doubling the number of green cards . so i think what's important for us to understand and there is a way forward on this issue that we an bring our country together on . and while i'm president i will do it . and it will begin by bringing illegal immigration under control and proving to the american people . 
kasich . . . dana , in a way that maximizes their value for sale for profit . it is disgusting , and the american people need to hear it . . . 
trump inaudible . big difference . 
bush i didn't mention him the second time . 
cruz well , you know , david , the assessment the voters are making here in new hampshire and across the country is they are evaluating each and every one of us . they are looking to our experience . they are looking to our knowledge . they are looking to our temperament and judgment . they are looking to our clarity of vision and our strength of resolve . the world is getting much more dangerous . we've had seven years with barack obama in the oval office , a commander in chief that is unwilling even to acknowledge the enemy we're facing . this is a president who , in the wake of paris , in the wake of san bernardino , will not even use the words radical islamic terrorism , much less focus on defeating the enemy . i am convinced every individual standing on this stage , would make a much better commander in chief than barack obama or hillary clinton or bernie sanders . and the primary voters are making the assessment for each of us , who is best prepared to keep this country safe , to rebuild the military , to rebuild our navy , our air force , our army , our marines , and to ensure that we keep america safe . 
rubio the palestinians are not a real estate deal , donald . 
paul well , i think if we left it open , we could see how many people smoked pot in high school . laughter 
trump . . . language . two days ago he said he would take his pants off and moon everybody , and that's fine . nobody reports that . he gets up and says that , and then he tells me , oh , my language was a little bit rough . . . 
paul neil , there's a point i'd like to make here . . . . . . . neil , a point that i'd like to make about the tax credits . we have to decide what is conservative and what isn't conservative . is it fiscally conservative to have a trillion dollar expenditure ? we're not talking about giving people back their tax money . he's talking about giving people money they didn't pay . it's a welfare transfer payment . so here's what we have . is it conservative to have 1 trillion in transfer payments a new welfare program that's a refundable tax credit ? add that to marco's plan for 1 trillion in new military spending , and you get something that looks , to me , not very conservative . thank you . crosstalk 
rubio no , there are several . obviously there are so many , i can't talk to them every day . i spoke to one of them , he told me exactly what happened . they signed up for this course because they believed mr . trump was this fantastic businessman , that donald is going to teach them the tricks of the trade . they signed up . they paid 15 , 000 for this course . they were asked for additional money for this course . if they really wanted the real secrets of success , they had to pay even more money , and so they did . and you know what they got in these courses ? stuff you can pull off of zillow . when they finally realized what a scam it was , they asked for their money back . and you refused to give them their money back . why don't you tonight . . . 
bush south carolina south carolinians need to know this , because the cato institute , which grades governors based on their spending , rank him right at the bottom . 
kasich well , i think it takes three things , wolf . and i've done it . i mean , i we got the budget balanced . we cut the capital gains tax . you see , in order to get this economy moving again , you have to grow the economy , and you have to restrain the spending . and when i was chairman , we cut that capital gains tax and we instituted a significant program to get to balance . we had a balanced budget four years in a row , had to take on every interest group in washington every single one of them and we paid down a half a trillion of the national debt . and why do you do it ? because you want job growth . if you don't have regulatory reform , common sense regulations , reasonable tax cuts , which i have , and a fiscal plan , you won't get there . you will never be able to do it . now , i i inherited an an 8 billion hole in ohio , i have common sense regulations , i have tax cuts the biggest of any governor in the country and we have a fiscal plan . and it's not all it's not always cutting . it's innovating it's producing a better product at , frankly , a lower price . now we have a 2 billion surplus . our credit is strong , our pensions are strong . and , look i've got a plan to take to washington , and i will have it there in the first hundred days , and it will include shifting welfare , education , transportation , medicaid and job training back to us , so we can begin , in the states , to be the laboratories of innovation . i've done it i did it in washington four years of balanced budgets . no one could even believe it happened . bell ringing i've done it in ohio , we're growing , the jobs are up and people are having opportunity . and i will go back to washington and do it again for the american people . i promise you that . within the first hundred days , we will have the plan to get this done . 
trump correct . 
rubio . . . the better business bureau gave it a d minus . 
bush right after me , and then i'll i'll yield yield the floor . what do you guys say in the senate when you're talking and debating ? 
fiorina . . . absolutely . . . 
carson not exactly what i said . 
trump excuse me , jeb ! 
fiorina it is why we have to simplify . it is why we have to reduce the size and power of government . 
christie oh , so wait a second . is that one of the skills you get as a united states senator esp also ? because i don't think it is . 
bush it's a public use . 
bush maria ? 
christie there is no . . . 
trump cnn spent a lot of money on a poll , just came out . i'm at 49 . he's at 15 . he tells me about 65 percent of the people . it's not 65 percent of the people . if you go by that , 85 percent of the people . then he goes , we have five . and well , excuse me , i won 10 . i won 10 states . if you listen to him , it's like i won 10 states . everybody knows that on super tuesday trump was the winner . there wasn't one person that didn't say that . even the two people on your left and right said we did a great job . so how does he take how does he take five and say it's better than 10 ? 
bush he called me a liar . 
trump i don't think i am . i think i'm closer to common sense . we are going to repeal obamacare . we're going to repeal obamacare . we are going to replace obamacare with something so much better . and there are so many examples of it . and i will tell you , part of the reason we have some people laughing , because you have insurance people that take care of everybody up here . i am self funded . the only one they're not taking care of is me . we have our lines around each state . the insurance companies are getting rich on obamacare . the insurance companies are getting rich on health care and health services and everything having to do with health . we are going to end that . we're going to take out the artificial boundaries , the artificial lines . we're going to get a plan where people compete , free enterprise . they compete . so much better . in addition to that , you have the health care savings plans , which are excellent . what i do say is , there will be a certain number of people that will be on the street dying and as a republican , i don't want that to happen . we're going to take care of people that are dying on the street because there will be a group of people that are not going to be able to even think in terms of private or anything else and we're going to take care of those people . and i think everybody on this stage would have to agree . . . bell rings . . . you're not going to let people die , sitting in the middle of a street in any city in this country . 
christie look at him smiling at me right now . i know ben didn't mean it about me . one of these other guys , i'm sure . 
trump . . . you'll end up with world war iii . . . 
kasich 
trump he has lied so much about my record . 
cruz well , you know , i would note that marco knows what he's saying isn't true . you know , mark levin wrote a column last week that says that the attack ads his super pac is running that are saying the same thing , that they are knowingly false and they are , in fact , alinsky like attacks like barack obama . and the reason is simple . what he knows is that the old program covered 20 percent to 30 percent of phone numbers to search for terrorists . the new program covers nearly 100 percent . that gives us greater ability to stop acts of terrorism , and he knows that that's the case . 
trump we're going to make many cuts in business . we're getting rid of we're going to get rid of so many different things . department of education common core is out . we're going local . have to go local . environmental protection we waste all of this money . we're going to bring that back to the states . and we're going to have other inaudible many things . we are going to cut many of the agencies , we will balance our budget , and we will be dynamic again . 
christie maria , neil , thank you for a great tonight . when i think about the folks who are out there at home tonight watching , and i think about what they had to watch this week the spectacle they had to watch on the floor of the house of representatives , with the president of the united states , who talked a fantasy land about the way they're feeling . they know that this country is not respected around the world anymore . they know that this country is pushing the middle class , the hardworking taxpayers , backwards , and they saw a president who doesn't understand their pain , and doesn't have any plan for getting away from it . i love this country . it's the most exceptional country the world has ever known . we need someone to fight for the people . we need a fighter for this country again . i've lived my whole life fighting fighting for things that i believe in , fighting for justice and to protect people from crime and terrorism , fighting to stand up for folks who have not had enough and need an opportunity to get more , and to stand up and fight against the special interests . but here's the best way that we're going to make america much more exceptional it is to make sure we put someone on that stage in september who will fight hillary clinton and make sure she never , ever gets in the white house again . i am the man who can bring us together to do that , and i ask for your vote . 
fiorina dana , with all being said to mr . trump . . . 
trump i never said walk away . i wouldn't want to walk away . i want them to pay us much more money . we cannot afford to subsidize . . . 
carson well , first of all , thank you not asking me what i said in the 10th grade . i appreciate that . laughter and applause 
rubio well , we'll put on our website , marcorubio . com . we're going to . . . crosstalk 
rubio yes , let me three points of distinction . the first is , if you're an american citizen and you decide to join up with isis , we're not going to read you your miranda rights . you're going to be treated as an enemy combatant , a member of an army attacking this country . number two , we do need our defense capabilities . it is a fact that the cuts we are facing today and the cuts that senator cruz would have supported would leave us with an even smaller air force and a smaller navy than the one we are going to be left with . and the final point that i would make is hillary clinton and barack obama's strategy is to lead from behind . it sounds like what he is outlining is not to lead at all . we cannot continue to outsource foreign policy . we must lead . we are the most powerful nation in the world . we need to begin to act like it , again . 
fiorina dana , i'd like to . . . 
cruz the way you bring manufacturing back to america is , number one , you lift the regulations . as president , i will repeal obamacare , the biggest job killer in america . i will pull back the federal regulators , the epa and all the regulators that are killing small businesses and manufacturing . and my tax plan , which is a very , very detailed plan on the website , tedcruz . org , is what's called border adjustable . we get rid of all the taxes . we get rid of the corporate income tax and the death tax and the obamacare taxes and the payroll tax . and we replace it with a 16 percent business flat tax that is border adjustable , which means all exports are entirely tax free and all imports pay the 16 percent business flat tax . that's a 32 percent differential . what that will do , chris , is bring millions of manufacturing jobs back to this country , bring the steel industry back to this country , create an environment where when we compete on a fair and level playing field , american ingenuity can beat anyone . but right now , the federal government isn't giving us a level playing field . 
carson . . . on to our property , it's ridiculous . 
christie jake listen . while i'm as entertained as anyone by this personal back and forth about the history of donald and carly's career , for the 55 year old construction worker out in that audience tonight who doesn't have a job , who can't fund his child's education , i've got to tell you the truth . they could care less about your careers , they care about theirs . let's start talking about that on this stage and stop playing and stop playing the games . stop playing 
cruz . . . i will repeal every word of obamacare . 
trump such a cute sound bite . 
cruz you supported it when we were battling over defunding planned parenthood . you went on . . . 
bush . . . i remember , megyn . laughter 
rubio but radical terrorism cannot be solved by intellect . it cannot they require what they need , is they need an operating space . that's what afghanistan was for al qaida . it was a vacuum that they filled , and they created an operating space . that's why they had to be drawn out of there . that's why they had to be destroyed . it is the reason why isis has grown as well . we allowed them we allowed a vacuum to emerge in syria . they used it as an operating space to grow ; and today they're not just in iraq and syria anymore , they're now in libya , conducting operations in the sinai . they're now in afghanistan , trying to supplant the taliban as the most powerful radical jihadist group on the ground there , as well . you cannot allow radical jihadists to have an operating safe haven anywhere in the world . 
rubio . . . i do want to rebuild the american military . 
rubio i get to respond , right ? 
rubio well , that's undeniable . first of all , they've said , they've encouraged people to do so . and you've seen the speeches of the palestinian authority president how glorious this is that they're doing these sorts of things . but let me go back for a moment . the policy donald has outlined , i don't know if he realizes , is an anti israeli policy . maybe that's not your intent but here's why it is an anti israeli policy . there is no peace deal possible with the palestinians at this moment . there just isn't . because there's no one to negotiate with . the palestinian authority is not interested in a serious deal and they are now in union with hamas , an organization whose specific purpose is the destruction of the jewish state . every time that israel has turned over territory of any kind , be is gaza , or now in judea and sumaira , it is used as a launching pad to attack israel . and that's what will happen again . these groups are not interested in a deal with israel . what they are interested in is ultimately removing the jewish state and occupying its entire territory . bell rings so maybe in 30 years the conditions will exist , but they do not exist now . 
trump they're fine . do you know what ? they're fine . 
trump they won't refuse . they're not going to refuse me . believe me . 
trump i'm using facts . 
paul if you want boots on the ground , and you want them to be our sons and daughters , you got 14 other choices . there will always be a bush or clinton for you , if you want to go back to war in iraq . but the thing is , the first war was a mistake . and i'm not sending our sons and our daughters back to iraq . the war didn't work . we can amplify those who live there . the kurds deserve to be armed and i'll arm them . we can use our air force to amplify the forces there . but the boots on the ground need to be the people who live there . my goodness , i'm still upset with the saudi arabians for everything they do over there . they've funded the arms that went to the jihadists . they're not accepting any of the people , any of the migrants that have been the refugees that are being pushed out of syria . saudi arabia is not accepting one . why are we always the world's patsies that we have to go over there and fight their wars for them ? they need to fight their wars , we need to defend american interests , but it is not in america's national security interests to have another war in iraq . 
kasich first of all yes . first of all , look , we have to make it clear to russia what we expect . we don't have to declare an enemy , rattle a sword or threaten , but we need to make it clear what we expect . no . 1 is we will arm the folks in ukraine who are fighting for their freedom . they deserve it . there will be no ifs , ands or buts about it . secondly , an attack on nato , trumped up on any excuse of russian speaking people , either in the nato countries or in finland or sweden , is going to be an attack on us . and look , i think we have an opportunity as america to put something really great together again . the egyptians , the saudis , the jordanians , the gulf states , they all know they're at risk . we need to look into europe , we look at france , we look at germany and the migrants . we look at belgium , we look at britain . everybody now is being threatened by radical islam . we have an opportunity to lead . you know , the fact of the matter is the world is desperate for our leadership . sometimes they may they may make a remark here or there that we don't like , but frankly , the world needs us . and we have an opportunity now to assemble a coalition of the civilized people , those who respect civilization , the rights of women , the rights to protest , to be able to reassert our leadership all across this globe again and make sure this century is going to be the best we've ever seen . 
rubio well , then make them in america . 
trump i'm not playing to anybody's fantasies , i'm playing to the fact that our country is in trouble , that we have a tremendous problem with crime . the border is a disaster , it's like a piece of swiss cheese . we're going to stop it , we're going to stop people from coming into our country illegally . we're going to stop it . cheering 
rubio our next president . . . 
bush . . . i remember . . . 
carson well , that's easy to answer . i didn't have an involvement with them . that is total propaganda , and this is what happens in our society . total propaganda . i did a couple of speeches for them , i do speeches for other people . they were paid speeches . it is absolutely absurd to say that i had any kind of a relationship with them . do i take the product ? yes . i think it's a good product . 
cruz . . . stand up together and say , hand over this treaty , and protect this country . 
bush so here's the deal . i'm sick and tired of barack obama blaming my brother for all of the problems that he has had . and , frankly , i could care less about the insults that donald trump gives to me . it's blood sport for him . he enjoys it . and i'm glad he's happy about it . but i am sick and tired . . . 
trump i borrowed 1 million , i turned it into 10 billion . . . 
trump and we don't need a weak person being president of the united state , ok ? because that's what we'd get if it were jeb i tell you what , we don't need that . 
walker jake , just one more moment . this is there's something bigger to this . now , i like so many other governors here , i defunded planned parenthood four and a half years ago , in a blue state . but it's bigger than that . we did that in a blue state , we took the money and put it into women's health , so we did exactly what we're talking about here . but i think the bigger issue here is we should be able to do this nationally , and this is precisely why so many republicans are upset with washington . they see the house and they see the senate and they say why can't we pass this . why can't we defund planned put it in a spending bill . forget about the 60 vote rule , there's no reason and the constitution doesn't call for 60 votes . pass it with 51 votes , put it on the desk of the president 
rubio ms . dana , i agree that english is the unifying language of our country , and everyone should learn to speak it . it's important . i want to tell you a story about someone that didn't speak english that well . it was my grandfather ; he came to this country in the 1960s , as a escaping cuba . and he lived with us , growing up . and my grandfather loved america . he understood what was so special about this country . he loved ronald reagan ; he would be very proud of the fact that we're here this evening . my grandfather instilled in me the belief that i was blessed to live in the one society in all of human history where even i , the son of a bartender and a maid , could aspire to have anything , and be anything that i was willing to work hard to achieve . but he taught me that in spanish , because it was the language he was most comfortable in . and he became a conservative , even though he got his news in spanish . and so , i do give interviews in spanish , and here's why because i believe that free enterprise and limited government is the best way to help people who are trying to achieve upward mobility . and if they get their news in spanish , i want them to hear that directly from me . not from a translator at univision . 
fiorina . . . ronald reagan walked away at reykjavik . 
cruz what you do is you enforce the law . i've laid out a very , very detailed immigration plan on my website , tedcruz . org . it's 11 pages of existing federal law and in particular the question of what to do with people who are here now ? you enforce the law . that means you stop the obama administration's policy of releasing criminal illegal aliens . do you know how many aliens bill clinton deported ? 12 million . do you know how many illegal aliens , george w . bush deported ? 10 million . we can enforce the laws and if we secure the border , that solves the problem . and as president i will solve this problem and secure the border . 
bush he is definitely my friend . and i think the states ought to create these standards . and if states want to opt out of common core , fine . just make sure your standards are high . because today in america , a third of our kids , after we spend more per student than any country in the world other than a couple rounding errors , to be honest with you , 30 percent are college and or career ready . if we are going to compete in this world we're in today , there is no possible way we can do it with lowering expectations and dumbing down everything . children are going to suffer and families' hearts are going to be broken that their kids won't be able to get a job in the 21st century . 
trump oh , give me a break . . . 
trump i think that what should happen , getting back maybe a little bit to your first question , i think that whoever first of all , i think i'm going to have the delegates . ok ? i think . let's see what happens . but if somebody doesn't have the delegates , and i guess there's two of us up here that can and there are two of us that cannot at this moment . but if no , that's just by the way , that is not meant to be a criticism . that's just a mathematical fact . ok ? if two of us get up there , i would say this , if if marco , if the governor , if ted had more votes than me in the form of delegates , i think whoever gets to the top position as opposed to solving that artificial number that was by somebody , which is a very random number , i think that whoever gets the most delegates should win . that's what i think . 
trump i would listen to the generals , but i'm hearing numbers of 20 , 000 to 30 , 000 . we have to knock them out fast . look , we're not allowed to fight . we can't fight . we're not knocking out the oil because they don't want to create environmental pollution up in the air . i mean , these are things that nobody even believes . they think we're kidding . they didn't want to knock out the oil because of what it's going to do to the carbon footprint . we don't fight like we used to fight . we used to fight to win . now we fight for no reason whatsoever . we don't even know what we're doing . so , the answer is we have to knock them out . we have to knock them out fast . and we have to get back home . and we have to rebuild our country which is falling apart . 
rubio well , and i don't he may have lined up with their positions on this issue . but here is the bottom line . every proposal they put forward are going to be proposals that will make it harder to do business in america , that will make it harder to create jobs in america . single parents are already struggling across this country to provide for their families . maybe a billionaire here in california can afford an increase in their utility rates , but a working family in tampa , florida , or anywhere across this country cannot afford it . so we are not going to destroy our economy . we are not going to make america a harder place to create jobs in order to pursue policies that will do absolutely nothing , nothing to change our climate , to change our weather , because america is a lot of things , the greatest country in the world , absolutely . but america is not a planet . and we are not even the largest carbon producer anymore , china is . and they're drilling a hole and digging anywhere in the world that they can get a hold of . so the bottom line is , i am not in favor of any policies that make america a harder place for people to live , or to work , or to raise their families . 
rubio . . . that's false . . . 
fiorina you know , it's interesting to me , mr . trump said that he heard mr . bush very clearly and what mr . bush said . i think women all over this country heard very clearly what mr . trump said . 
trump you don't have to . take it from lawrence tribe . crosstalk take it from your professors . . . crosstalk 
christie well , first off , let's face it , the fbi director james comey was a friend of mine who i worked with as u . s . attorney of new jersey . he was the u . s . attorney in manhattan . he said , there's a chill wind blowing through law enforcement in this country . here's why , the president of the united states and both his attorney's general , they give the benefit of the doubt to the criminal , not to the police officers . that's the truth of the matter and you see it every time with this president . every time he's got a chance , going all the way back to remember that great beer summit he had after he messed up that time . this is a guy who just believes that law enforcement are the bad guys . now , i for seven years was the u . s . attorney of new jersey . i worked hard with not only federal agents but with police officers and here's the problem , sanctuary cities is part of the problem in this country . that's where crime is happening in these cities where they don't enforce the immigration laws . and this president turns his back this president doesn't enforce the marijuana laws in this country because he doesn't agree with them . and he allows states to go ahead and do whatever they want on a substance that's illegal . this president allows lawlessness throughout this country . here's what i would do neil , i would appoint an attorney general and i would have one very brief conversation with that attorney general . i'd say , general , enforce the law against everyone justly , fairly , and aggressively . make our streets safe again . make our police officers proud of what they do but more important than that , let them know how proud we are of them . we do that , this country would be safe and secure again not only from criminals but from the terrorist who threaten us as well . i'm the only person on this stage who's done that and we will get it done as president of the united states . 
trump correct . 
trump well , look , this is so easy to answer . isis is recruiting through the internet . isis is using the internet better than we are using the internet , and it was our idea . what i wanted to do is i wanted to get our brilliant people from silicon valley and other places and figure out a way that isis cannot do what they're doing . you talk freedom of speech . you talk freedom of anything you want . i don't want them using our internet to take our young , impressionable youth and watching the media talking about how they're masterminds these are masterminds . they shouldn't be using the word mastermind . these are thugs . these are terrible people in isis , not masterminds . and we have to change it from every standpoint . but we should be using our brilliant people , our most brilliant minds to figure a way that isis cannot use the internet . and then on second , we should be able to penetrate the internet and find out exactly where isis is and everything about isis . and we can do that if we use our good people . 
trump you can go back . you're not talking . you interrupted me . 
bush i think we're focusing a whole . . . 
trump that's going to solve the problem . and , the insurance companies aren't going to say that , they want to keep it . they want to say they say whatever they have to say to keep it the way it is . i know the insurance companies , they're friends of mine . the top guys , they're friends of mine . i shouldn't tell you guys , you'll say it's terrible , i have a conflict of interest . they're friends of mine , there's some right in the audience . one of them was just waving to me , he was laughing and smiling . he's not laughing so much anymore . hi . look , the insurance companies are making an absolute fortune . yes , they will keep preexisting conditions , and that would be a great thing . get rid of obamacare , we'll come up with new plans . but , we should keep preexisting conditions . 
bush i've got about five or six . . . 
trump . . . the national poll a national poll where he's at 15 , he's at 14 . . . 
trump be honest . be honest . no , this was before . the check came early . but let me just tell you , syria , he's saying that i was in favor of syria . he said i was in favor of libya ? i never discussed that subject . i was in favor of libya ? we would be so much better off if gadhafi were in charge right now . if these politicians went to the beach and didn't do a thing , and we had saddam hussein and if we had gadhafi in charge , instead of having terrorism all over the place , we'd be at least they killed terrorists , all right ? and i'm not saying they were good because they were bad , they were really bad , but we don't know what we're getting . you look at libya right now , isis , as we speak , is taking over their oil . as we speak , it's a total mess . we would have been better off if the politicians took a day off instead of going into war . 
trump i know my people . 
fiorina jake ? 
rubio well , in fact , i agree we should have won and i wished we would have , but , in fact , you did criticize him for using the term self deportation . i mean , that's on the record and people can look it up right now online . but , again , i just want to reiterate , i think it's really important , this point . i think it's fine , it's an important point that you raise and we discuss on immigration . this is a big issue for texas , a huge issue for the country . but i also think that if you're going to claim that you're the only one that lifted this into the campaign , that you acknowledge that , for example , you're only person on this stage that has ever been fined for hiring people to work on your projects illegally . you hired some workers from poland . . . 
carson well , first of all , let me just mention on the tax issue . bencarson . com , go read about it , because my tax plan has been praised by cato , by wall street journal . forbes said it is the best , the most pro growth tax plan , and it's based on real fairness for everybody . starts at the 150 percent poverty level , but even the people below that have to pay something , because everybody has to have skin in the game , and the millions of people can't , you know , talk about what other people have to pay and have no skin in the game . and it deals with corporate tax rate , and makes it the same as everybody else . . . bell rings . . . everybody pays exactly the same . 
cruz you know , i think most people know exactly what new york values are . laughter 
trump i actually think i have the best temperament . i built a massive corporation . i employ thousands and thousands of people . i've gotten along with people for years and years , have tremendous relationships with many people , including politicians on both sides . and no matter how you cut it , when i when i came out , i hit immigration , i hit it very hard . everybody said , oh , the temperament , because i talked about illegal immigration . now , everybody's coming to me , they're all trying to say , well , he's right , we have to come to him . i hit other things . i talked about muslims . we have a problem . nobody else wanted to mention the problem , i brought it up . i took a lot of heat . we have to have a temporary something , because there's something going on that's not good . and remember this , i'm the only one up here , when the war of iraq in iraq , i was the one that said , don't go , don't do it , you're going to destabilize the middle east . so , i'm not one with a trigger . i'm not one with a trigger . other people up here , believe me , would be a lot faster . but i'll build the mill arbitrary stronger , bigger , better than anybody up here , and nobody is going to mess with us . that , i can tell you . 
carson neurosurgeon . 
bush so i was i was i was mentioned , so i can bring up something , i think , right ? look , the simple fact is , if you think this is tough you're not being treated fairly . . . 
rubio well , i think the experience is not just what you did , but how it worked out . under chris christie's governorship of new jersey , they've been downgraded nine times in their credit rating . this country already has a debt problem , we don't need to add to it by electing someone who has experience at running up and destroying the credit rating of his state . but i would add this . let's dispel with this fiction that barack obama doesn't know what he's doing . he knows exactly what he's doing . he is trying to change this country . he wants america to become more like the rest of the world . we don't want to be like the rest of the world , we want to be the united states of america . and when i'm elected president , this will become once again , the single greatest nation in the history of the world , not the disaster barack obama has imposed upon us . 
rubio we can't even have an economy if we're not safe . there are radical jihadist in the middle east beheading people and crucifying christians . a radical shia cleric in iran trying to get a nuclear weapon , the chinese taking over the south china sea . . . . . . yes , i believe the world is a safer no , no , i don't believe , i know that the world is a safer place when america is the strongest military power in the world . cheering and applause 
kasich well , states if states want to do it , they ought to sit down with businesspeople and the lawmakers and figure out what will work . but hold on a second here with everything else . i'm the only person on this stage who actually was the chief architect of balancing the federal budget . it's not a theory for me . it's not it's not some you have to know how to put everything together . and you know , i spent 10 years of my life to get there , and i did not do that because i'm worshiping at some balanced budget shrine . the reason i did it is when you have commonsense regulations , lower taxes on individuals and businesses , and you have a fiscal plan that makes sense , the job creators will expand employment . and what happened ? when i was there , the jobs were exploding . bill clinton's tried to take credit for it . when i went to ohio , we're up 400 , 000 jobs . it's the same formula . but it isn't easy . i fought the entire washington establishment and won , because when you balance a budget , you must affect every single thing . everything in the federal government specifically . you cannot get there with theories or broad statements , and you have to be willing to take the heat . in fact , i fought a republican president , who i thought was not offering constructive proposals to fix this economy . so when we talk about all this , there's one person on this stage and one person who's been a candidate for president in either party that restored economic strength , growth , a balanced budget , paid down debt , cut taxes , the things that people in this country want . no theories . reality . 
trump if you think about it . . . 
paul well , that's a real question . is there going to be any change in the house with new leadership ? i frankly don't think there will be much change because i think what's going to happen is you're going to get more of the same . people in washington think they were sent there to be adults and govern and do all this . well , you know what i'm worried about ? not keeping the government open . i'm worried about bankrupting the american people . we're borrowing a million dollars a minute . that is important . and that's what we have to contrast . keeping the government open and continuing to borrow a million dollars a minute . crosstalk 
cruz donald , adults learn . . . 
kasich well , first of all , in ohio we're changing the whole system . universities will not get paid one dime unless the student graduates or graduates or completes a course . secondly , you can be in high school and complete almost an entire first year before you go to college and get credit to do that . and , of course , in addition to that , we are working now to go after the cost drivers in our universities . and let me give you an example . universities today have so many non academic assets . at ohio state they sold the parking garage and the parking lot , and they got 500 million because they shouldn't be in the parking lot business . they shouldn't be in the ding business , they shouldn't be in the dorm business . and , of course , we need to take advantage of on line education to reduce these costs and begin to dis intermediate the cost of four years . now , for those who that have these big high costs , i think we can seriously look at an idea of where you can do public service . i mean legitimate , public service and begin to pay off some of that debt through the public service that you do . and in the meantime , it may inspire us to care more about our country , more about ourselves . this is a big moral issue in america . living a life bigger than yourself , and being a center of healing and justice . and people can learn it through public service . 
cruz i will veto any budget that doesn't fund planned parenthood , and republicans surrender . we need to stop surrendering and start standing . . . 
trump yes , yes , yes . 38 years ago . 
rubio but that doesn't answer the question . crosstalk 
carson first of all , i've been talking about this for over a year . we have to destroy their caliphate because that gives them legitimacy to go ahead with the global jihad . we have to take their energy because they are isis is the richest terrorist organization there is . we have to take their oil , shut down all of the mechanisms whereby they can disperse money because they go after disaffected individuals from all over the place , and they're able to pay them . that makes a difference . as far as the command centers are concerned in raqqa and to a lesser degree mosul , cut those off . do the same kind of thing that we did with sinjar a few weeks ago , working with our embedded special forces with the kurds , shut off the supply route , soften them up , then we go in with specials ops followed by our air force to take them over . those are things that work . but also , you know , this whole concept of boots on the ground , you know , we've got a phobia about boots on the ground . if our military experts say , we need boots on the ground , we should put boots on the ground and recognize that there will be boots on the ground and they'll be over here , and they'll be their boots if we don't get out of there now . 
rubio about every two weeks , he holds a press conference talking about how he can't wait to restrict people's access to guns . he has never defended . . . crosstalk . . . i'll give you a fact . well , let me tell you this . do you remember when he ran for president of the united states , and he was a candidate , and he went and said , these americans with traditional values , they are bitter people , and they cling to their guns and to their religion . that tells you right away where he was headed on all of this . this president every chance he has ever gotten has tried to undermine the second amendment . he doesn't meet here's the difference . when he meets with the attorney general in the white house , it's not how can we protect the second amendment rights of americans . it's give me options on how i can make it harder for law abiding people to buy guns . that will never happen when i am president of the united states . 
trump well , let's see . i'm at 42 , and you're at 3 . so , so far , i'm doing better . 
trump i gave some refunds to people because if they asked for the refunds in a certain period of time , and we gave refunds to people . 
trump or a tax . 
trump the woman ultimately didn't want to do that . i walked away . 
cruz . . . george w . bush appointed john roberts , and let me give you the consequences of that . if , instead , the president bush had appointed edith jones , and mike luttig , which is who i would have appointed , obamacare would have been struck down three years ago , and the marriage laws of all 50 states would be on the books . these matter , and i fought to defend the constitution my whole life . . . 
trump got along with everybody . 
paul . . . isis will now be in charge of syria . . . 
carson i would not raise it . i would not raise it , specifically because i'm interested in making sure that people are able to enter the job market and take advantage of opportunities . 
kasich i wouldn't . i wouldn't . 
rubio because . . . 
rubio well , you're talking about yeah . 
bush thank you , donald , for allowing me to speak at the debate . that's really nice of you . really appreciate that . what a generous man you are . twelve million illegal immigrants , to send them back , 500 , 000 a month , is just not not possible . and it's not embracing american values . and it would tear communities apart . and it would send a signal that we're not the kind of country that i know america is . and even having this conversation sends a powerful signal they're doing high fives in the clinton campaign right now when they hear this . that's the problem with this . we have to win the presidency . and the way you win the presidency is to have practical plans . lay them out there . what we need to do is allow people to earn legal status where they pay a fine , where they work , where they don't commit crimes , where they learn english , and over an extended period of time , they earn legal status . that's the path a proper path . . . crosstalk 
kasich look , the bottom line is the people of this of this country and this state want to see everybody rise , and they want to see unity , and i don't want to get into all this fighting tonight , because people are frankly sick of the negative campaigning . 
trump call it what you want , people are not going to be dying on the sidewalk . 
trump a lot of time let me talk . quiet . a lot of times a lot of times . . . 
cruz so does the government pay for everyone's health care ? 
trump we have some protesters who are bad dudes , they have done bad things . they are swinging , they are really dangerous and they get in there and they start hitting people . and we had a couple big , strong , powerful guys doing damage to people , not only the loudness , the loudness i don't mind . but doing serious damage . and if they've got to be taken out , to be honest , i mean , we have to run something . and it's not me . it's usually the municipal government , the police because i don't have guards all over these stadiums . i mean , we fill up stadiums . it's usually the police and , by the way , speaking of the police , we should pay our respects to the police because they are taking tremendous abuse in this country and they do a phenomenal job . so we should pay we should truly give our police . they're incredible people , we should give them a great deal more respect than they receive . 
bush . . . i appreciate that , i really do , thank you . 
paul marco still misunderstands the immigration issue . what i put forward was an amendment that would have temporarily halted immigration from high risk terrorist countries , but would have started it up , but i wanted them to go through global entry , which is a program where we do background checks . the thing is , is that every terrorist attack we've had since 9 11 has been legal immigration . marco wants to expand that . i want more rules , more scrutiny , and to defend the country , you have to defend the border . 
fiorina sorry , but you haven't gotten to me . this is why . . . 
bush look , i'm pro life . in fact , on this stage , i'm the most pro life person because i've acted on it for eight years as governor of the state of florida . where we abolished partial birth abortion , where parents have the right to be notified when their teenage child is having an abortion . we were the first state to do a choose life license plate to raise money for adoption . we were the first state to have state monies go to crisis pregnancy centers , which recently was just increased to 4 million a year . we created greater regulation on abortion clinics , where there were horrific procedures . so i'm pro life , but i believe there should be exceptions rape , incest and when the life of the mother is in danger . and so , that belief , and my consistency on this , makes me , i think , poised to be in the right place , the sweet spot for a republican nominee . and others may have a different view and i respect it . 
trump i don't know exactly what when you talk about off the record . first of all , buzzfeed ? they were the ones that said under no circumstances will i run for president . and were they wrong . but a lot of people said that . then , i did have a meeting with the editorial board of the new york times , a very nice meeting . many of those things were off the record , i think at their suggestion and my suggestion . and i think being off the record is a very important thing . i think it's a very , very powerful thing . and i will say this . these three gentlemen have gone off the record many times with reporters . and i think they want to honor it , and i would always honor that . i will say , though , in terms of immigration and almost anything else there always has to be some , you know , tug and pull and deal . and , you know , when i watch ted stand on the senate floor , i had great respect for what he did . he stood there for a day and a half or something . in the meantime , what came of it ? nothing . you have to be able to have some flexibility , some negotiation . now , sometimes you ask for more than you want and you negotiate down to the point . i may have discussed something like that with the new york times , but i would never release off the record conversations . i don't think it's fair , frankly , to do that to anybody . 
trump so we're listening to the all talk , no action politician , and he was the primary supporter of john roberts , who gave us obamacare . 
bush i would try to convince him otherwise , but this last back and forth between two senators back bench senators , you know , explains why we have the mess in washington , d . c . we need a president that will fix our immigration laws and stick with it , not bend with the wind . the simple fact is one of the ways , maria , to solve the problem you described is narrow the number of people coming by family petitioning to what every other country has so that we have the best and the brightest that come to our country . we need to control the border , we need to do all of this in a comprehensive way , not just going back and forth and talking about stuff 
cruz . . . because iran has declared war on us . but we shouldn't be toppling regimes . . . crosstalk . . . that are fighting radical islamic terrorists that are helping . . . 
carson well , first of all , let me just add my praise to justice scalia . i first met him when we got an honorary degree together a long time ago . a tremendous wit and intellect . as far as religious freedom is concerned , one of the basic tenets of this nation , and i believe that the constitution protects all of our rights . and it gives people who believe in same sex marriage the same rights as everybody else . but what we have to remember is even though everybody has the same rights , nobody get extra rights . so nobody gets to redefine things for everybody else and then have them have to conform to it . that's unfair . and this is the responsibility of congress to come back and correct what the supreme court has done . that's why we have divided government . and we're going to have to encourage them to act in an appropriate way , or we will lose our religious freedom . and as president , i would go through and i would look at what a person's life has been . what have they done in the past ? what kind of judgments have they made ? what kind of associations do they have ? that will tell you a lot more than an interview will tell you . the fruit salad of their life is what i will look at . 
rubio well , first let me say that one out of four calls to our office is about a veteran here in florida that's struggling with the v . a . my brother is a veteran . he's struggling with the v . a . the other day , we heard this horrible story . it was a headline in usa today , and it said , calls to the v . a . suicide hotline went to voicemail . well , about a few days ago , we now found out that one of the gentlemen one of the veterans who left a voicemail committed suicide . and they happened to call him back the day after he died . people need to be held accountable for this . one of the things i'm proudest of is that in my time in the u . s . senate working with jeff miller here from florida in a bipartisan way , and i'll give him credit bernie sanders was a part of this we passed a v . a . accountability bill . and what it did is it created now a law that gives the v . a . secretary , because of the law i passed , it gives the v . a . secretary the power to fire people that aren't doing a good job . senior executives should be held accountable if the v . a . outreach isn't working . the problem is no one's being held accountable . even after we passed that law , no one's been fired for no outreach . no one's been fired for calls going to the voicemail . no one's been disciplined . no one's been demoted . when i'm president of the united states , if you work at the v . a . and you are not doing a good job , you will be fired from your job at the v . a . 
trump . . . about my record . 
rubio yeah , i would go , first of all , one step further in this description of hillary clinton . she wouldn't just be a disaster , hillary clinton is disqualified from being commander in chief of the united states . someone who cannot handle intelligence information appropriately cannot be commander in chief and someone who lies to the families of those four victims in benghazi can never be president of the united states . ever . on the issue of barack obama , barack obama does not believe that america is a great global power . barack obama believes that america is a arrogant global power that needs to be cut down to size . and that's how you get a foreign policy where we cut deals with our enemies like iran and we betray our allies like israel and we gut our military and we go around the world like he has done on 10 separate occasions and apologized for america . he doesn't understand the threat in isis . he consistently underestimates it but i do not . there is a war against isis , not just against isis but against radical jihadists terrorists , and it is a war that they win or we win . when i'm president of the united states , we are going to win this war on isis . the most powerful intelligence agency in the world is going to tell us where we are , the most powerful military in the world is going to destroy them . and if we capture any of them alive , they are getting a one way ticket to guantanamo bay , cuba , and we are going to find out everything they know . 
bush . . . they're not doing that . . . 
trump you don't know . 
cruz and i'll tell you what , donald , you you very kindly just a moment ago offered me the v . p . slot . laughter i'll tell you what . if this all works out , i'm happy to consider naming you as v . p . so if you happen to be right , you could get the top job at the end of the day . 
cruz . . . then i'll buy you a tequila . . . 
christie well , jake , i was named u . s . attorney by president bush on september 10th , 2001 . and that next day my wife mary pat did what she did every day , she traveled through the world trade center and went to her office two blocks from the world trade center . and after those planes hit , for five and a half hours after that , i couldn't reach her , didn't know whether she was dead or alive , and we had three children at the time , 8 , 5 and 1 . and i had to confront what so many thousands of others in my region had to confront , the idea i might become a single parent , the idea that my life and my children's life might be changed forever . we lost friends that day . we went to the funerals . and i will tell you that what those people wanted and what they deserved was for america to answer back against what had been done to them . and i support what president bush did at that time , going into afghanistan , hunting al qaeda and its leaders , getting its sanctuary out of place , and making it as difficult around the world for them to move people and money . and then he went to prosecutors like us , and he said , never again . don't prosecute these people after the crime is committed . intervene before the crime happens . i absolutely believe that what the president did at the time was right . and i am proud to have been one of the people on the stage who was part of making sure that what governor bush said before was the truth . america was safe for those seven years and barack obama has taken that safety away from us . 
kasich well , the last usa today poll had me beating hillary clinton by 11 points , more than anybody on this stage . secondly , i hope you saw tonight that executive experience really matters . it matters in terms of growing our economy , balancing budgets , cutting taxes , reforming regulations . i've done it in washington , i've done it in ohio , and i can go back to washington and do it again . but i hope you also noticed tonight that i do have the foreign policy experience , not just a few years , but a lot of years in working with some of the great , great minds in this country to develop the expertise , the confidence , the firmness , the toughness and the ability to bring people together . i hope you all think about giving me your vote . i would appreciate it very much . and i tell you , we won't have to spend time figuring what we're going to do . i will hit the ground running and we will get america moving again . thank you all very much . 
rubio if it's being abused the way disney did . understand that program , it is illegal now under that program to use it to replace american workers . under that program , you have to prove not only that you're not replacing americans , but that you've tried to hire americans . and if a company is caught abusing that process , they should never be allowed to use it again . the second problem with the current structure of the program that people perhaps don't understand is a lot of these companies are not directly hiring employees from abroad . they are hiring a consulting company like tata , for example , out of india . that company then hoards up all of these visas . they hire workers . you hire disney or some other company hires this company . what they're basically doing is they are insourcing and outsourcing . they are bringing in workers from abroad that are not direct employees of a disney or someone else , they're employees of this consulting business . and what i argue is that no consulting business such as that should be allowed to hoard up all of these visas , that the visas should only be available for companies to use to directly hire workers and that we should be stricter in how he enforce it . it is illegal now , it is a violation of the law now to use that program to replace americans . and if a company is caught doing that , whether it be disney or anyone else , they should be barred from using the program in the future . 
trump yes , i would . and i've been there . and i've been there very strongly . i do have to say something , and this is interesting and it's not anybody's fault . it's not ted's fault . justice roberts was strongly recommended and pushed by ted . justice roberts gave us obamacare . might as well be called roberts care . two times of the supreme court , justice roberts approved something that he should have never raised his hand to approve . and we ended up with obamacare . that is a rough thing . and i know ted feels badly about it . and i think he probably still respects the judge . but that judge has been a disaster in terms of everything we stand for because there is no way no way that he should have approved obamacare . now , with that being said , these are the things that happen . but ted very , very strongly pushed judge roberts , and justice roberts gave us something that we don't want . 
rubio i want to thank rand for another 30 seconds , because , number one , what he's pointing to is a bill last week that amendment that he voted for that only 10 people voted for . you know why ? because it's not focused on terrorists . it would have banned anyone from coming here . someone from taiwan would not have been able to come here as a tourist . number two , this program , this metadata program is actually more strict than what a regular law enforcement agency has now . if a regular law enforcement agency wants your phone records , all they have to do is issue a subpoena . but now the intelligence agency is not able to quickly gather records and look at them to see who these terrorists are calling . and the terrorists that attacked us in san bernardino was an american citizen , born and raised in this country . and i bet you we wish we would have had access to five years of his records so we could see who he was working with . . . crosstalk 
bush so , there so , there is all sorts of intrigue about where i disagree with my brother , there would be one right there . you should not use eminent domain for private purposes . a baseball stadium or a parking lot for a limo . . . laughter 
paul for a decade . so i think you're on the wrong side of this if you're still arguing for a single payer system . 
kasich well , ladies and gentlemen , if hillary clinton or bernie sanders were to win this election , my 16 year olds , i i worry about what their life is going to be like . you know , the conservative movement is all about opportunity . it is about lower taxes . it's about balanced budgets . it's about less regulation . and it's about sending power , money and influence back to where we live so we can run america from the bottom up . in addition to that , once we have the power and the money and the influence with programs we shift out , that each of us have a responsibility to reach out and to rebuild our families , make them stronger , and connect our neighborhoods . all that together wealth , connection , family america's greatest days are ahead . we must win this election . 
trump correct . 
carson if someone had tried to describe today's america to you 30 years ago , you would have listened in disbelief . americans know that our nation is heading off the abyss of destruction , secondary to divisiveness , fiscal irresponsibility , and failure to lead . marco , donald , ted , john , we will not solve any of these problems by trying to destroy each other . what we need to do is be looking for solutions tonight . it's not about us , it's about the american people . 
bush ever ready , it's very high energy , donald . 
cruz wolf , can i respond to that attack ? 
cruz all right , i'll respond . . . crosstalk 
trump yes , it has been going for a long time . 
trump this isn't tough and easy . i wish it . . . 
trump . . . and , i'm at 49 , so when he says 75 percent , that would mean that 80 percent of the people don't dig you , and i'm back down to 50 . . . 
rubio correct . 
paul no , i think it's a huge mistake . i think regime change in syria , and this is what i've been saying this for several years now . in 2013 when we first went in , i said , you are going to give arms to the allies of al qaida , to radical jihadists ? that's crazy . but the other thing i said is the great irony is you will be back fighting against your own weapons . had assad been bombed when he used chemical weapons two years ago , isis would be in charge of all of syria now . we have to have a more realistic foreign policy and not a utopian one where we say , oh , we're going to spread freedom and democracy , and everybody in the middle east is going to love us . they are not going to love us . crosstalk 
trump ? . . . inaudible . . . 
trump and they actually did a very good job , but i've won most of the lawsuits . 
carson since i was mentioned . . . 
cruz that moment was what reagan would call a time for choosing . when it comes to deciding which side of the line you're on , the rubio schumer amnesty plan . . . booing . . . apparently supported by the donor class , which is why washington supported it . the rubio schumer amnesty plan passed the senate , and it was on the verge of passing the house . house leadership intended to take it up and pass it with the democrats overruling most of the republicans . and the question for anyone on illegal immigration is , where were you in that fight ? where did you stand ? you are right . there is a difference between senator rubio and me on this question . crosstalk 
cruz well , sure . this deal in washington is an example of why washington's broken . republican leadership joined with every single democrat , add 80 trillion to our debt to do nothing to fix the problems . and , let me now on social security because we were getting into a good substantive exchange , and i want to say i think both chris , and mike are right . governor huckabee's exactly right , we need to honor the promises made to our seniors , but for younger workers look . i'm 44 years old . it is hard to find someone in my generation that thinks social security will be there for us . we can save and preserve and strengthen social security by making no changes for seniors , but for younger workers gradually increasing the retirement age , changing the rate of growth so that it matches inflation , and critically allowing younger workers to keep a portion of our tax payments in a personal account that we own , we control them , we can pass on to our kids . 
trump . . . in one poll . . . 
huckabee 1 . 1 trillion by the year 2050 . we change the economy and the country . 
bush i'm rescinding the invitation . i thought you might want to come , but i guess not . 
trump true . laughter 
carson the rate the rate the rate is gonna be much closer to 15 percent . 
fiorina . . . we need to reform the department of defense , we need as well . . . 
trump i just want to say , i agree with that 100 percent , except pre existing conditions , i would absolutely get rid of obamacare . we're going to have something much better , but pre existing conditions , when i'm referring to that , and i was referring to that very strongly on the show with anderson cooper , i want to keep pre existing conditions . i think we need it . i think it's a modern age . and i think we have to have it . 
bush first of all , we could get to 4 percent growth . the new normal of 2 percent puts huge demands on government . the reason why we have structural deficits is that more and more people are relying on government and the growth that we don't have makes makes the deficit grow . a 4 percent growth strategy starts with tax reform . and the proposal that i've laid out is the one the wall street journal editorial board has said is the most pro growth of all the proposals out there . we cut the we eliminate a lot of deductions and cut the rates down . a corporate rate of 20 percent , which puts us 5 percent above below that of china , and allows us full expensing of investing . it would create an explosion of investment back into this country , creating higher wage jobs , and so that's part of it . on the regulatory side i think we need to repeal every rule that barack obama has in terms of work in progress , every one of them . and start over . for those that are already in existence , the regulation of the internet , we have to start over , but we ought to do that . the clean power act , we ought to repeal that and and start over on that . the waters of the united states act , which is going to be devastating for agriculture and many industries , we should repeal that . we should repeal the rules because the economic costs of this far exceed the social benefit . and if we're serious about being serious about high growth , then we have to recognize that small businesses right now , more of them are closing than than are than are being set up . hillary clinton has said that barack obama's policies get an a . really ? one in 10 people right now aren't working or have given up altogether , as you said . that's not an a . one in seven people are living in poverty . that's not an a . one in five children are on food stamps . that is not an a . it may be the best that hillary clinton can do , but it's not the best america can do . 
trump oh , stop it . 
kasich first of all , let me just say that , in the state of ohio and i'm the only acting executive on on this stage today we do have a moderate increase in the minimum wage . and i got to tell you , my father carried mail on his back . his father was a coal miner . he died of black lung . he was losing his eyesight . my mother's mother lived with us . she could barely speak english . i come from a town where if the wind blew the wrong way , people found themselves out of work . an economic theory is fine , but you know what ? people need help . now , i have a plan that , in fact , would cut taxes , but not 11 trillion or 12 trillion that would put my children further in debt . i have a plan that would not only cut taxes , lower the income tax rate for individuals , lower the tax for businesses so businesses will compete here and not move operations overseas , and also a plan the only plan of anybody standing on this stage to get us to a balanced budget by the end of a second term . and , you know , the simple fact of the matter is , we hear a lot of promises in this debate , a lot of promises about these tax cuts or tax schemes sometimes that i call them . hillary and the democrats promise everything on the spending side . we've got to be responsible about what we propose on the tax side . yes , lower taxes , lower spending . my website , johnkasich . com , will show you exactly how we balance the budget . i balanced the budget in washington as a chief architect , and i have balanced it in ohio for one reason . when you balance the budget and you cut taxes , people get work . and our most important moral purpose as leaders in the political system is to make sure we create an environment for job creation so people can live their dreams and realize their god given potential . that's why it's so important . and for those at the bottom , we've got to do what we can to train them so they can move up . but to just look the other way is not acceptable , because , you know what , as the governor of ohio i have to deal with real challenges , and we've gotten it done in our state , and i will do it for america . 
rubio . . . donald , might be able to inaudible palestinians and arabs , but it's not a real estate deal . . . 
fiorina can i just could i just say , as a chief executive who's had to make tough calls to save jobs and to grow jobs , i think what's interesting about dodd frank is it's a great example of how socialism starts . socialism starts when government creates a problem , and then government steps in to solve the problem . government created the problem . government created the problem of a real estate boom . how did we create it ? under republican and democrats alike , fannie mae and freddie mac , everybody gathered together , republicans and democrats , and said , home ownership is part of the american dream . let's create a bubble , and then government stepped in by the way , under president george w . bush , banks were told encouraged told , really to buy other banks , to take money . and now what do we have with dodd frank ? the classic of crony capitalism . the big have gotten bigger , 1 , 590 community banks have gone out of business , and on top of all that , we've created something called the consumer financial production bureau , a vast bureaucracy with no congressional oversight that's digging through hundreds of millions of your credit records to detect fraud . this is how socialism starts , ladies and gentlemen . we must take our government back . 
trump jeb said . . . 
fiorina you know why three ? 
trump every major business leader , has used the i never went bank bankrupt , by the way , as you know , everybody knows . but hundreds of companies , hundreds of deals , i used the law four times and made a tremendous thing . i'm in business . i did a very good job . but i will say this , and people are very , very impressed with what i've done , the business people . but when the folks of iowa found out the true facts of the job that you've done in wisconsin , all of a sudden you , tubed ph , he was no . 1 and now he's no . 6 or seven in the polls . so , look , we brought it out , you were supposed to make a billion dollars in the state . you lost 2 . 2 you have right now , a huge budget deficit . that's not a democratic point . that's a point . that's a fact . and when the people of iowa found that out , i went to no . 1 and you went down the tubes . 
trump you have a combination of factors . he can't do it . . . 
trump take a look excuse me . you are talking about hundreds of billions of dollars . . . 
cruz judgment , strength , clarity and trust . barack obama has said he doesn't believe in american leadership or america winning he is wrong . america can win again and we will win again . ronald reagan reignited the american economy , rebuilt the military , bankrupted the soviet union and defeated soviet communism . i will do the same thing . cutting taxes , cutting regulation , unleashing small businesses and rebuilding the military to defeat radical islamic terrorism our strategy is simple . we win , they lose . we've done it before and we can do it again . 
cruz well , bret , of course they have , and over the last six and a half years we've seen the consequences of the obama clinton foreign policy . leading from behind is a disaster . we have abandoned and alienated our friends and allies , and our enemies are stronger . radical islam is on the rise , iran's on the verge of acquiring a nuclear weapon , china is waging cyber warfare against america , russia general soleimani , you just mentioned , the iranian general is the head of the al quds forces . he's directly responsible for the murder of over 500 american servicemen in iraq , and part of this iranian deal was lifting the international sanctions on general soleimani . the day general soleimani flew back from moscow to iran was the day we believed that russia used cyber warfare against the joint chiefs . we need a new commander in chief that will stand up to our enemies , and that will have credibility . . . it is worth emphasizing that iran released our hostages in 1981 the day ronald reagan was sworn into office . 
trump because you have tremendous waste . i'll tell you . . . 
trump i will , and the wall just got 10 feet taller , believe me . it just got 10 feet taller . i saw him make that i saw him make the statement . i saw him use the word that he used . i can only tell you , if i would have used even half of that word , it would have been national scandal . this guy used a filthy , disgusting word on television , and he should be ashamed of himself , and he should apologize , ok ? number one . number two , we have a trade deficit with mexico of 58 billion a year . and that doesn't include all the drugs that are pouring across and destroying our country . we're going to make them pay for that wall . now , the wall is 10 billion to 12 billion , if i do it . if these guys do it , it'll end up costing 200 billion . but the wall is 10 billion to 12 billion . you need 1 , 000 you need 1 , 000 miles . the great wall of china , built 2 , 000 years ago 2 , 000 , is 13 , 000 miles . we need 1 , 000 , because we have a lot of natural barriers . we can do it for 10 billion to 12 billion , and it's a real wall . this is a wall that's a heck of a lot higher than the ceiling you're looking at . this is a wall that's going to work . mexico will pay for it , because they are not doing us any favors . they could stop all of this illegal trade if they wanted to . . . bell ringing . . . immediately . mexico will pay for the wall . it's a small portion of the kind of money that we lose and the deficits that we have with mexico . 
trump first of all , i'd like to just go back to one . in july of 2004 , i came out strongly against the war with iraq , because it was going to destabilize the middle east . and i'm the only one on this stage that knew that and had the vision to say it . and that's exactly what happened . 
rubio . . . that's a fake school . 
cruz have you said you're a liberal on health care ? 
bush i do . i believe that the great majority of people coming here illegally have no other option . they want to provide for their family . but we need to control our border . it's not it's our responsibility to pick and choose who comes in . so i i've written a book about this and yet this week , i did come up with a comprehensive strategy that that really mirrored what we said in the book , which is that we need to deal with e verify , we need to deal with people that come with a legal visa and overstay . we need to be much more strategic on how we deal with border enforcement , border security . we need to eliminate the sanctuary cities in this country . it is ridiculous and tragic . . . . . . that people are dying because of the fact that that local governments are not following the federal law . there's much to do . and i think rather than talking about this as a wedge issue , which barack obama has done now for six long years , the next president and i hope to be that president will fix this once and for all so that we can turn this into a driver for high sustained economic growth . and there should be a path to earned legal status . . . timer sounds . . . for those that are here . not not amnesty , earned legal status , which means you pay a fine and do many things over an extended period of time . 
trump you know what , let's see what happens in court . this is a civil case . very easy to have settled . could settle it now . very easy to have settled . let's see what happens at the end of a couple years when this case is over , ok ? 
trump . . . no , no . before they had the information . . . 
kasich well , you know , on the way over here , even getting ready earlier and sitting in the green room and watching the early coverage , you know , my father carried mail on his back and his father was a coal miner and my mother's mother was an immigrant , could barely speak english . and i'm standing on this stage . it's pretty remarkable . but i want to tell you , there's a lot of young people watching tonight . you can do whatever you want to do in your life . america is an amazing country , where a kid like me can grow up to run for president of the united states and be on this stage tonight . so to all the young people that are out there , your hopes , your dreams , pursue them . shoot for the stars . america's great , and you can do it . thank you , wolf . 
trump don't make things up . 
rubio . . . alright , inaudible . . . 
carson everybody should pay the same proportion of what they make . you make 10 billion , you pay a billion . you make 10 , you pay one . you get same rights and privileges . i don't see how anything gets a whole lot fairer than that . but you also have to get rid of all the deductions and all the loopholes because that is the thing that tilts it in one direction or another . and you have to set the rate at an appropriate level . now i will say that , there are a lot of people who say , if you get rid of the deductions , you ruin the american dream because , you know , home mortgage deduction . but the fact of the matter is , people had homes before 1913 when we introduced the federal income tax , and later after that started deductions . and they say there will be no more charitable giving . we had churches before that and charitable organizations before that . the fact of the matter is , i believe if you put more money in people's pockets that they will actually be more generous rather than less generous . and it's . . . . . . the money that they earned . and , the other thing is , i do care about the poor people . and in the system that we're putting together , there will be a rebate for people at the poverty level . but i also want to emphasize the fact that as we get the economy moving , and i hope i get a question about how do we get the economy moving , there will be a lot more opportunities for poor people not to be poor people because this is america . this is the land of dreams . and our policies should be aimed at allowing people to realize that dream . 
kasich . . . look , i hate to crash the party to you , mr . baker , but , you know , what's fair . . . 
paul i'm a different kind of republican . i've introduced a five year balanced budget . i've introduced the largest tax cut in our history . i stood for ten and a half hours on the senate floor to defend your right to be left alone . but i've also gone to chicago . i've gone to detroit . i've been to ferguson , i've been to baltimore , because i want our party to be bigger , better and bolder , and i'm the only one that leads hillary clinton in five states that were won by president obama . i'm a different kind of republican . 
rubio well , because i'm influencing social policy this is their money . this is the money of parents . you don't earn the tax credit unless you're working . that's your money , it doesn't belong to government . here's what i don't understand . if a business takes their money and they invest in the piece of the equipment , they get to write off their taxes . but if a parent takes money that they have earned to work and invests in their children , they don't ? this makes no sense . parenting is the most important job any of us will ever have . family formation is the most important thing in society . so what my tax plan does , is it does create , especially for working families , an additional child tax credit . so that parents who are working get to keep more of their own money , not the government's money , to invest in their children to go to school , to go to a private school , to buy a new backpack . let me tell you , if you're a parent that's struggling , then you know that 50 a month is the difference between a new pair of shoes this month or not getting a new pair of shoes for your kids . i'm going to have a tax plan that is pro family , because the family is the most important institution in society . you cannot have a strong country without strong families . 
cruz washington deals are bankrupting this country . there are several deal makers on this stage but there is only one person who has consistently stood up to both parties , fighting for the american people against the washington deals . if i'm elected president , on the first day in office i will rescind every single illegal and unconstitutional executive action . i will instruct the department of justice to open an investigation into planned parenthood and prosecute any criminal violations . i will instruct every federal agency that the persecution of religious liberty ends today . i will rip to shreds the iranian catastrophic iranian nuclear deal . and i will begin the process of moving the american embassy in israel to jerusalem . we will repeal obamacare , abolish of irs , secure the border , and bring back jobs . 
paul but let me respond . the thing is , is that in florida , governor bush campaigned against medical marijuana . that means that a small child like morgan hintz ph that has seizures is day , is failing on non traditional medications , is not allowed to use cannabis oil . and if they do that in florida , they will take the child away , they will put the parents in jail . and that's what that means if you're against allowing people use medical marijuana , you'll actually put them in jail . 
kasich you know , at the end of the day , i'm going to continue to talk about my record , because there is , did you ever notice when people run for office , they run for president , they make a lot of promises , they don't keep them . 
rubio chris chris , your state got hit by a massive snowstorm two weeks ago . you didn't even want to go back . they had to shame you into going back . and then you stayed there for 36 hours and then he left and came back to campaign . those are the facts . here's the bottom line . this notion that barack obama doesn't know what he's doing is just not true . he knows exactly what he's doing . 
trump that's wrong . that's wrong . totally wrong . 
christie you know what , megyn , can i . . . 
trump no , i'm not . first of all , very few people listen to your radio show . that's the good news . laughter let me just tell you , let me just which happens to be true . check out the ratings . look , let me just tell you something . let me just tell you something . i want to release my tax returns but i can't release it while i'm under an audit . we're under a routine audit . i've had it for years , i get audited . and obviously if i'm being audited , i'm not going to release a return . as soon as the audit is done , i love it . 
trump i was so happy yesterday when i saw that decision come down . that was an unbelievable decision . and we don't have enough of those decisions coming down . he of the executive order , because nobody wants to listen to him , including the democrats , so he just goes around signing executive orders . that was a great day . and , frankly , we have to stop illegal immigration . it's hurting us economically . it's hurting us from every standpoint . it's causing tremendous difficulty with respect to drugs and what that does to many of our inner cities in particular . and it really is was such an unbelievable moment because the courts have not been ruling in our favor . and it was a 2 1 decision . and it was a terrific thing that happened . and i will tell you , we are a country of laws . we need borders . we will have a wall . the wall will be built . the wall will be successful . and if you think walls don't work , all you have to do is ask israel . the wall works , believe me . properly done . believe me . cheering and applause 
trump our country doesn't win anymore . we used to win , we don't win anymore . we lose on trade . we lose with isis . we lose with one of the worst deals i've ever seen negotiated of any kind , that's our recent catastrophe with iran . we don't win . let me give you one quick example . these folks , cnbc , they had it down at three , three and a half hours . i just read today in the new york times , 250 , 000 for a 30 second ad . i went out and said , it's ridiculous . nobody i could stand up here all night . nobody wants to watch three and a half , or three hours . it was a back sacrifice , and i have to hand it to ben . we called ben , he was with me 100 . we called in , we said , that's it . we're not doing it . they lost a lot of money , everybody said it couldn't be done . everybody said it was going to be three hours , three and a half , including them , and in about two minutes i renegotiated it so we can get the hell out of here . not bad . 
carson and you could still have thousands of dollars left over . and let me just finish , because i don't get to talk that much . and , you know , let's . . . . . . you can have the money that's left over to buy your catastrophic insurance . but most importantly , we give them a menu , just like we do in medicare part c , and they have the choices that will allow them not only to have catastrophic health care , but drug care and everything else . it will be such a good program that nobody will want obamacare after that , and that's probably the best way do it , although if anybody still did , i would still de fund it . 
kasich oh , well , listen , i think being in iraq , look , we thought there were weapons of mass destruction . colin powell , who is one of the most distinguished generals in modern time , said there were weapons there . but , but , the fact is we got ourselves in the middle of a civil war . the sunni , the shia and the kurds , never gotten along . in fact , that country was drawn the borders of that country were drawn after world war i by westerners that didn't understand what was happening there . the tragedy of it is that we're still embroiled . and , frankly , if there weren't weapons of mass destruction , we should never have gone . i don't believe the united states should involve itself in civil wars . civil wars are not in our direct interest , and if you and look , i served on a defense committee for 18 years and was called into the pentagon after 9 11 by secretary rumsfeld to deal with some of the most serious problems that we faced . the fact is , is that we should go to war when it is our direct interest . we should not be policemen of the world , but when we go , we mean business . we'll do our job . we'll tell our soldiers , our people in the service , take care of your job and then come home once we've accomplished our goals . that's what we need to do . 
trump look , look , look . we need a toughness . we need strength . we're not respected , you know , as a nation anymore . we don't have that level of respect that we need . and if we don't get it back fast , we're just going to go weaker , weaker and just disintegrate . we can't allow that to happen . we need strength . we don't have it . when jeb comes out and he talks about the border , and i saw it and i was witness to it , and so was everyone else , and i was standing there , they come across as an act of love , he's saying the same thing right now with radical islam . and we can't have that in our country . it just won't work . we need strength . 
cruz 13 hours tomorrow morning , a new movie will debut about the incredible bravery of the men fighting for their lives in benghazi and the politicians that abandoned them . i want to speak to all our fighting men and women . i want to speak to all the moms and dads whose sons and daughters are fighting for this country , and the incredible sense of betrayal when you have a commander in chief who will not even speak the name of our enemy , radical islamic terrorism , when you have a commander in chief who sends 150 billion to the ayatollah khamenei , who's responsible for murdering hundreds of our servicemen and women . i want to speak to all of those maddened by political correctness , where hillary clinton apologizes for saying all lives matter . this will end . it will end on january 2017 . and if i am elected president , to every soldier and sailor and airman and marine , and to every police officer and firefighter and first responder who risk their lives to keep us safe , i will have your back . 
cruz let me tell you right now , donald , i will not apologize for a minute for defending the constitution . i will not apologize for defending the bill of rights . and i find it amazing that your answer to hugh and to the american people is , on religious liberty , you can't have one of the these crazy zealots that actually believes in it . you've got to be willing to cut a deal . and you know , there is a reason why , when harry reid was asked , of all the people on this stage , who does he want the most , who does he like the most , harry reid said donald donald trump . why ? because donald has supported him in the past , and he knows he can cut a deal with him . bell ringing you know what , donald . . . crosstalk 
trump you're looking well . you're looking well . 
trump i've hired tens of thousands of people over my lifetime . tens of thousands . . . 
rubio this guy always goes for . . . 
trump well , before i go there , i will tell you , i will bring jobs back from china . i will bring jobs back from japan . i will bring jobs back from mexico , where new hampshire , by the way , has been virtually wiped out . they've lost so many businesses going to mexico because of horrible trade deals . and now we're about to sign another trade deal , tpp , which is going to be a disaster for this country because they don't talk about monetary manipulation . it is going to be a disaster . i'm going to bring jobs back and i'll start bringing them back very fast . under my tax plan right now , we're the highest taxed country in the world . under my plan , we cut not only taxes for the middle class , but we cut taxes for corporations . we will bring back trillions of dollars that's offshore . right now , they have 2 . 5 trillion , and in my opinion , it's much more than that . that's what the government says . all of that money is going to come back . and we're not going to lose pfizer , which is now leaving , and other great companies , which is now leaving . and they're all leaving . we have many , many companies that are leaving this country . we're not going to lose them anymore because we're going to have a tax structure that is going to keep them in our country . 
paul here's the problem , governor . here's the problem , governor . you fundamentally misunderstand the bill of rights . every time you did a case , you got a warrant from a judge . i'm talking about searches without warrants . . . 
cruz well , rick , it's a very important question . i have got deep concerns about the fed . the first thing i think we need to do is audit the fed . and i am an original co sponsor of rand paul's audit the fed legislation . the second thing we need to do is i think we need to bring together a bipartisan commission to look at getting back to rules based monetary policy , end this star chamber that has been engaging in this incredible experiment of quantitative easing , qe1 , qe2 , qe3 , qe infinity . and the people who are being impacted , you know , a question that was asked earlier , becky asked , was about working women . you know , it's interesting , you look at on wall street , the fed is doing great . it's driving up stock prices . wall street is doing great . you know , today , the top 1 percent earn a higher share of our income than any year since 1928 . but if you look at working men and women . if you look at a single mom buying groceries , she sees hamburger prices have gone up nearly 40 percent . she sees her cost of electricity going up . she sees her health insurance going up . and loose money is one of the major problems . we need sound money . and i think the fed should get out of the business of trying to juice our economy and simply be focused on sound money and monetary stability , ideally tied to gold . 
trump well , first of all , i don't think they do under president obama because i think he's treated israel horribly , all right ? i think he's treated israel horribly . i was the grand marshall down 5th avenue a number of years ago for the israeli day parade , i have very close ties to israel . i've received the tree of life award and many of the greatest awards given by israel . as president , however , there's nothing that i would rather do to bring peace to israel and its neighbors generally . and i think it serves no purpose to say that you have a good guy and a bad guy . now , i may not be successful in doing it . it's probably the toughest negotiation anywhere in the world of any kind . ok ? but it doesn't help if i start saying , i am very pro israel , very pro , more than anybody on this stage . but it doesn't do any good to start demeaning the neighbors , because i would love to do something with regard to negotiating peace , finally , for israel and for their neighbors . and i can't do that as well as a negotiator , i cannot do that as well if i'm taking big , big sides . with that being said , i am totally pro israel . 
trump you get the congress . you get the senate . you get together . you do legislation . he just writes out an order , executive order . it's not supposed to happen that way . 
rubio that's a fact . people can look it up . i'm sure people are googling it right now . look it up . trump polish workers , you'll see a million dollars for hiring illegal workers on one of his projects . he did it . that happened . 
fiorina and then it'll be my turn . 
huckabee you're welcome . laughter let me tell you , donald trump would be a president every day of the week and twice on sunday , rather than hillary . i've spent a lifetime in politics fighting the clinton machine . you want to talk about what we're going to be up against next year ? i'm the only guy on this stage you know , everybody has an only guy i'm the only guy this ; i'm the only guy that . well , let me tell you one thing that i am the only guy the only guy that has consistently fought the clinton machine every election i was ever in over the past 26 years . and not only did i fight them , but i beat them . somebody says i'm a fighter . well , i want to know , did you win ? well , i did . and not only did i fight them and win , i lived to tell about it and i'm standing on this stage tonight as evidence of that . and i think that ought to be worth something . 
trump you're going to see , you don't know . . . 
trump well , i heard hugh hewitt , a nice man , he apologized because he actually said that we had a misunderstanding . and he said today that donald trump is maybe the best interview there is anywhere that he has ever done . now unless he was just saying that on cnn to be nice , but he did say that . . . crosstalk 
trump first of all i've had tens of thousands of people working for me , most of which are 98 , 97 , 98 percent of the people in this country , from this country . i'm very proud of it . you have a club in palm beach , florida called the mar a lago club , it's a very , very successful club . it has a very short season , it's called , the season , and it goes from november until march . it's a few months , five months at the most . people don't want a short term job . they don't want so , we will bring people in , and we will send the people out . all done legally , all done with the process that's . . . bell ringing . . . approved by government in palm beach , or west palm beach . we bring people in , we bring them out . we want to hire as many americans as we can , but they don't want part time , very short part time jobs . 
fiorina they want it to be an issue that they can use . as to birthright citizenship . . . 
christie let's get something . . . 
rubio . . . so , you're only thing is to get rid of the lines around the states . what else is part of your healthcare plan . . . 
cruz well , we have 80 years of precedent of not confirming supreme court justices in an election year . and let me say , justice scalia . . . 
trump if i become president , we will do something really special . we will make this country greater than ever before . we'll have more jobs . we'll have more of everything . we were discussing disease , we were discussing all sorts of things tonight , many of which will just be words , it will just pass on . i don't want to say politicians , all talk , no action . but a lot of what we talked about is words and it will be forgotten very quickly . if i'm president , many of the things that we discussed tonight will not be forgotten . we'll find solutions . and the world will respect us . they will respect us like never before . and it will be actually a friendlier world . and i have to say , it is a great honor to be here tonight . 
trump are you going to ask anybody else that question ? 
trump as to north korea ? 
carson well , you know , when i wasn't introduced no . 2 , as was the plan , i thought maybe he thought i already had dropped out . but . . . but you know , today is the 105th anniversary , or 105th birthday of ronald reagan . his 11 commandment was not to speak ill of another republican . so , i'm not going to use this opportunity to savage the reputation of senator cruz . but i will say i will say i will say that i was very disappointed that members of his team thought so little of me that they thought that after having hundreds , if not thousands of volunteers and college students who sacrificed their time and were dedicated to the cause one even died to think that i would just walk away ten minutes before the caucus and say , forget about you guys . i mean , who would do something like that ? now , i don't think anyone on this stage would do something like that . and to assume that someone would , what does that tell you ? so , unfortunately , it did happen . it gives us a very good example of certain types of washington ethics . washington ethics . washington ethics basically says , if it's legal , you do what you need to do in order to win . that's not my ethics . my ethics is , you do what's right . 
trump we have to be much tougher . we have to be much stronger than we've been . we have people that know what is going on . you take a look at just the attack in california the other day . there were numerous people , including the mother , that knew what was going on . they saw a pipe bomb sitting all over the floor . they saw ammunition all over the place . they knew exactly what was going on . when you had the world trade center go , people were put into planes that were friends , family , girlfriends , and they were put into planes and they were sent back , for the most part , to saudi arabia . they knew what was going on . they went home and they wanted to watch their boyfriends on television . i would be very , very firm with families . frankly , that will make people think because they may not care much about their lives , but they do care , believe it or not , about their families' lives . 
trump i have not made that decision yet . i will make a decision on that , but i have not made that decision . my decision was that i would go through the entire primary season and i have turned down probably 275 million worth . i have many , many friends that come up all day long , 5 million , 10 million , i'm turning down money . i feel sort of foolish to be honest with you . i don't know if i get any credit for it but i'm self funding my campaign . and other than and by the way , other than very small donations where people are sending in 200 , 15 , 20 , and we have some of that , but it's not a large amount . no , i'm self funding my campaign , and the reason is that i've been in this business a long time and i was on the other side until eight months ago i was on the or side . i made massive contributions , large contributions to politicians , both democrats and republicans . i was liked by everybody , which is an important thing . i will say this people control special interests , lobbyists , donors , they make large contributions to politicians and they have total control over those politicians . i don't want anybody to control me but the people right out there . and i'm going to do the right thing . 
trump i just want to say and i'm a big fan of the governor , but they also struck oil , ok , so that helped iowa a lot . 
trump no , no . i have very good answers . 
trump i'm totally open to a tariff . if they don't treat us fairly , hey , their whole trade is tariffed . you can't deal in china without tariffs . they do it to us , we don't it . it's not fair trade . 
trump well , first of all , it's not only russia . we have problems with north korea where they actually have nuclear weapons . you know , nobody talks about it , we talk about iran , and that's one of the worst deals ever made . one of the worst contracts ever signed , ever , in anything , and it's a disgrace . but , we have somebody over there , a madman , who already has nuclear weapons we don't talk about that . that's a problem . china is a problem , both economically in what they're doing in the south china sea , i mean , they are becoming a very , very major force . so , we have more than just russia . but , as far as the ukraine is concerned , and you could syria as far as syria , i like if putin wants to go in , and i got to know him very well because we were both on 60 minutes , we were stablemates , and we did very well that night . but , you know that . but , if putin wants to go and knocked the hell out of isis , i am all for it , 100 , and i can't understand how anybody would be against it . . . 
rubio yeah . immigration is not an issue that i read about in the newspaper or watch a documentary on pbs or cnn . it's an issues i've lived around my whole life . my family are immigrants . my wife's family are immigrants . all of my neighbors are immigrants . i see every aspect of this problem . the good , the bad , and the ugly . and here's what we learned in 2013 . the american people don't trust the federal government to enforce our immigration laws , and we will not be able to do anything on immigration until we first prove to the american people that illegal immigration is under control . and we can do that . we know what it takes to do that . it takes at least 20 , 000 more additional border agents . it takes completing those 700 miles of fencing . it takes a mandatory e verify system and a mandatory entry exit tracking system to prevent overstays . after we have done that , the second thing we have to do is reform and modernize the legal immigration system . and after we have done those two things , i think the american people are gonna be reasonable with what do you do with someone who has been in this country for 10 or 12 years who hasn't otherwise violated our laws because if they're a criminal they can't stay . they'll have to undergo a background check , pay a fine , start paying taxes . and ultimately , they'll given a work permit and that's all they're gonna be allowed to have for at least 10 years . but you can't get to that third step until you have done the other two things , and that was the lesson we learned in 2013 . there is no trust that the federal government will enforce the law . they will not support you until you see it done first . 
cruz i did not nominate him . i would not have nominated him . i would've nominated my former boss liberman , who was justice scalia's first law clerk . and you know how i know that donald's supreme court justices will be liberals ? because his entire life , he support liberals from jimmy carter , to hillary clinton , to john kerry . in 2004 , he contributed to john kerry . nobody who cares about judges would contribute to john kerry , hillary clinton , chuck schumer and harry reid . 
bush that was me . 
trump . . . it's a horrible deal . . . 
trump well , i i know diane foley very well . her husband and these are tremendous people . i spoke for them , i raised a lot of money for the foundation . i fully understand , james , one of that was really the first that we saw , really visually saw it was so horrible . and i will tell you , though , with all of that being said , you can not negotiate this way with terrorists . if you do , you are going to have many , many more james foleys . james foley was a great young man . his parents are incredible people . they've done such a good job , since his since his death . but you just cannot negotiate that way with terrorists , or you're gonna have so many other james foleys . and one thing on the vets during the last debate , i raised 6 million for the vets , and i will tell you something . . . . . . i will tell you that i think nobody here , nobody on this stage , gets along with the veterans groups in new hampshire better than i do without ball ph to sarel ph and all of the people that i deal with and these are great people . the one thing that we're not mentioning , there's tremendous fraud , waste and abuse in the veterans administration and if i'm running things , that's going to disappear . . . bell rings . . . and it's going to disappear quickly . 
cruz . . . his record right now is one of repeatedly hiring illegal aliens . . . 
trump you said it . 
rubio . . . his plan . that was the plan . . . 
cruz of course it does . and we've seen for seven years a president that has made the presidency and has made , sadly , his administration a laughing stock in the world . this administration started with president obama sending back the bust of winston churchill to the united kingdom within the opening weeks . then he proceeded to go on a worldwide apology tour apologizing for the united states of america . our friends and allies quickly learned america could not be counted on . i'll tell you , when i travel abroad , when i meet with heads of states and defense ministers and foreign ministers , they say over and over again , it is hard to be friends with america ; we can't count on america ; america doesn't stand with us . and that is a disgrace . but the good news is , jake , we've seen this before . we have seen a weak democratic president undermine the military , weaken our readiness , weaken our respect in the world with jimmy carter . and in january 1981 , ronald reagan came into office and that can change overnight . it's worth remembering iran released our hostages the day ronald reagan was sworn into office . and america needs a president who stands with our friends and allies , as i will do , and who stands up and demonstrates strengths to our enemies . that's why on day one , i will rip to shreds this catastrophic iranian nuclear deal because the ayatollah khamenei must never be allowed to acquire nuclear weapons . 
fiorina problems have festered in washington for too long . and the potential of this nation is being crushed . 
bush i'm on the reagan side of this . 
bush yeah , they are unhinged . 
trump well , you have to understand , i am not sitting in the united states senate with , by the way , the worst voting record there is today . number one . i am not sitting in the united states senate . i'm a businessman doing business transactions . 
bush . . . imagine what it's going to be like dealing with putin or dealing with president xi . 
rubio i'm sorry i was mentioned . . . 
trump because nobody knows the system better than me . i know the h1b . i know the h2b . nobody knows it better than me . i'm a businessman . these are laws . these are regulations . these are rules . we're allowed to do it . and frankly , because of the devaluations that other countries the monetary devaluations that other countries are constantly doing and brilliantly doing against us , it's very , very hard for our companies in this country , in our country , to compete . so i will take advantage of it ; they're the laws . but i'm the one that knows how to change it . nobody else on this dais knows how to change it like i do , believe me . 
trump i gave him a check . he never funded me . 
trump i have a feeling it's going to work out , actually . crosstalk 
rubio . . . that's your only plan . . . 
kasich but i'm the little engine that can . and , yeah , look , when you're in the arena , and we're in the arena . and the people out here watching we're in the arena , we're traveling , we're working , we spend time away from our family , when you're in the arena , you enter a special circle . and you want to respect the people that you're in the arena with . so if he ends up as the nominee sometimes , he makes it a little bit hard but , you know , i will support whoever is the republican nominee for president . 
cruz yes , i would . and you know , i think this exchange actually highlights a real choice for republican primary voters . when it comes to foreign policy , do you want to continue on the same basic trajectory as the last seven years of the obama foreign policy ? when it comes to these deals , cuba and iran , they were negotiated by hillary clinton and john kerry . there's a real difference between us . donald supported hillary clinton and john kerry . and what he said right now is that he agrees in principle with what they're doing . the only thing he thinks is that they should negotiate a little bit better deals , they should be more effective . i have a fundamental disagreement and i think most republicans and most americans do , that we shouldn't be allowing billions of dollars to go to nations that hate us to go to cuba , to go to iran and to let them use those billions of dollars to try to murder us . 
trump you are not a negotiator . you are not a negotiator . and , with your thinking , you will never bring peace . you will never bring peace . . . 
rubio i do . 
trump again , where did i support it ? 
christie john , i'll tell you something . you want to talk about moral authority . let's talk about something that happened this week in the news . you know , the fbi director , the president's appointed fbi director has said this week that because of a lack of support from politicians like the president of the united states , that police officers are afraid to get out of their cars ; that they're afraid to enforce the law . and he says , the president's appointee , that crime is going up because of this . and when the president of the united states gets out to speak about it , does he support police officers ? does he stand up for law enforcement ? no , he doesn't . i'll tell you this , the number one job of the president of the united states is to protect the safety and security of the american people . this president has failed , and when i'm in the oval office , police officers will know that they will have the support of the president of the untied states . that's real moral authority that we need in the oval office . 
trump i borrowed 1 million . . . 
cruz now , that moment . . . 
carson well , i have also said , if anybody knows how to do that , that i would be willing to listen . and , if they can , you know , specify exactly how that's going to be done , and what the cost , and it sounds reasonable , then i think it's worth discussing . . . 
walker . . . a lot of those people , though , and i'm going to echo what senator rubio just said . this is an issue where , we're talking about my state , it's thousands of manufacturing jobs . thousands of manufacturing jobs for a rule the obama administration , own epa has said will have a marginal impact on climate change . so we're going to put thousands and thousands of jobs in my state , i think it's something like 30 , 000 in ohio , other states across this country , we're going to put people manufacturing jobs , the kind of jobs that are far greater than minimum wage , this administration is willing to put at risk for something its own epa says is marginal ph . . . 
cruz i believe it . no , no . i believe you know politicians much better than i do , because for 40 years , you've been funding liberal democratic politicians . and by the way . . . 
christie david ? hey , david ? david ? hey , david ? i actually have experience with raising taxes on millionaires in my state . it was done . it was done by my predecessor . and i want everybody in the public who is in that 68 percent , i want to tell you the truth . you're wrong . and here is why you're wrong . after new jersey raised taxes on millionaires , we lost , in the next four years , 70 billion in wealth left our state . it left our state to go where it would be treated more kindly . if the united states raised taxes any further , that money will leave the united states , as well . we won't have better jobs . let new jersey be the canary in the coal mine . it is a failed idea and a failed policy , it's class warfare . it happened in my state . i've stopped it from happening again . but we cannot do it . the 68 percent of the people are wrong about that , it will hurt the american economy . we tried it in new jersey . come take a look it did not work . 
cruz what i'm saying , dana , is that is a judgment for every voter to make . what i can tell you is all nine of the people here would make an infinitely better commander in chief than barack obama or hillary clinton . 
rubio let me be very careful when answering this , because i don't think national television in front of 15 million people is the place to discuss classified information . so let me just be very clear . there is nothing that we are allowed to do under this bill that we could not do before . this bill did , however , take away a valuable tool that allowed the national security agency and other law and other intelligence agencies to quickly and rapidly access phone records and match them up with other phone records to see who terrorists have been calling . because i promise you , the next time there is attack on an attack on this country , the first thing people are going to want to know is , why didn't we know about it and why didn't we stop it ? and the answer better not be because we didn't have access to records or information that would have allowed us to identify these killers before they attacked . crosstalk 
carson thank you , wolf . please join me for a moment of silence and remembrance of the san bernardino victims . thank you . you know , our country since its inception has been at war , every 15 or 20 years . but the war that we are fighting now against radical islamist jihadists is one that we must win . our very existence is dependent upon that . you know , as a pediatric neurosurgeon , i frequently faced life and death situations , and had to come up with the right diagnosis , the right plan , and execute that plan frequently with other colleagues . right now , the united states of america is the patient . and the patient is in critical condition and will not be cured by political correctness and will not be cured by timidity . and i am asking the congress , which represents the people , to declare a war on isis so that we can begin the process of excising that cancer and begin the healing process , and bring peace , prosperity , and safety back to america . 
kasich yeah , let me say a couple of things . first of all , when jeb was governor , his first four years as governor , he expand his medicaid program grew twice as fast as mine . o . k . ? it's just a fact . now , with obamacare , i've not only sued the administration , i did not set up an exchange . and he knows that i'm not for obamacare , never have been . but here's what's interesting about medicaid . you know who expanded medicaid five times to try to help the folks and give them opportunity so that you could rise and get a job ? president ronald reagan . now , the fact of the matter is , we expanded to get people on their feet , and once they're on their feet , we are giving them the training and the efforts that they need to be able to get work and pull out of that situation . 
walker this is actually what's wrong this is what's wrong with this debate . we're not talking about real issues . and mr . trump , we don't need an apprentice in the white house . we don't need an apprentice in the white house . we have one right now . he told us all the things we wanted to hear back in 2008 . we don't know who you are or where you're going . we need someone who can actually get the job done . and you talked about business . 
trump . . . he's really doing some bad . . . crosstalk 
trump excuse me . let me talk . if people . . . 
trump with jeb's attitude , we will never be great again , that i can tell you . we will never be great again . 
kasich well , i have one now they ph call me , unit one . my wife says , you'll never be unite one , i'm unite one . you're unit two . 
trump assad is a bad guy , but we have no idea who the so called rebels i read about the rebels , nobody even knows who they are . i spoke to a general two weeks ago , he said he was very up on exactly what we're talking about . he said , you know , mr . trump ? we're giving hundreds of millions of dollars of equipment to these people , we have no idea who they are . so , i don't like assad . who's going to like assad ? but , we have no idea who these people , and what they're going to be , and what they're going to represent . they may be far worse than assad . look at libya . look at iraq . look at the mess we have after spending 2 trillion dollars , thousands of lives , wounded warriors all over the place who i love , ok ? all over . we have nothing . and , i said , keep the oil . and we should have kept the oil , believe me . we should have kept the oil . and , you know what ? we should have given the oil . . . bell ringing . . we should've given big chunks to the people that lost their arms , their legs , and their families , and their sons , and daughters , because right now , you know who has a lot of that oil ? iran , and isis . 
trump yes . 
trump it's a minor civil case . 
bush our freedom is under attack . our economy is under water . the leading democrat is under investigation . and america is under the gun to lead the free world to protect our civilized way of life . serious times require strong leadership , that's what at stake right now . regarding national security , we need to restore the defense cuts of barack obama to rebuild our military , to destroy isis before it destroys us . regarding economic security , we need to take power and money away from washington d . c . and empower american families so that they can rise up again . look , america still is an exceptional country . we love to lead and we love to win . and we do it , when we take on any challenge and when we take we support our friends . as president , i will keep you and our country safe , secure , and free . thank you . 
huckabee i have a different idea . i think we ought to get rid of all the taxes on people who produce . why should we penalize productivity ? and it's why i'm an unabashed supporter of the fair tax , which would be a tax on our consumption , rather than a tax on our productivity . in other words , you're not going to tax anybody for what they earn , whether it's worker whose working by the hour or whether it's a hedge fund manager . if they can produce something and bring capital and labor to create jobs , we need some jobs . and i think the fair tax makes more sense . now , jake , i've been listening to everybody on the stage and there is a lot of back and forth about i'm the only one who has done this , the only one who has done that , i've done great things . we've all done great things or we wouldn't be on this stage . but it occurs to me as we're sitting here in the reagan library that most of us would like to pay tribute to a guy who , when he got elected , didn't get elected telling everybody how great he was . he got elected telling everybody how great the american people were . and he empowered them to live their dreams , which is what i'd love to see us do by no longer penalizing the people who are out there working because they are taking a gut punch right now . 
trump good . 
rubio there's no as you can see in his answer , it's always the same thing . 
cruz you know , let me say something at the outset . the questions that have been asked so far in this debate illustrate why the american people don't trust the media . this is not a cage match . and , you look at the questions donald trump , are you a comic book villain ? ben carson , can you do math ? john kasich , will you insult two people over here ? marco rubio , why don't you resign ? jeb bush , why have your numbers fallen ? how about talking about the substantive issues the people care about ? 
rubio on anything i want ? 
trump i would not do it . 
cruz i'm going to get a response to that , neil . there's no way he launches 11 attack 
cruz well , i am blessed to receive a word from god every day in receiving the scriptures and reading the scriptures . and god speaks through the bible . i'm the son of a pastor and evangelist and i've described many times how my father , when i was a child , was an alcoholic . he wasn't a christian . and my father left my mother and left me when i was just three years old . and someone invited him to clay road baptist church . and he gave his heart to jesus and it turned him around . and he got on a plane and he flew back to my mother and me . i would also note that the scripture tells us , you shall know them by their fruit . we see lots of campaign conservatives . but if we're going to win in 2016 , we need a consistent conservative , someone who has been a fiscal conservative , a social conservative , a national security conservative . there are real differences among the candidates on issues like amnesty , like obamacare , like religious liberty , like life and marriage . and i have been proud to fight and stand for religious liberty , to stand against planned parenthood , to defend life for my entire career . and i will be proud to continue to do so as president of the united states . cheering and applause 
rubio does ted cruz rule out ever legalizing people that are in this country now ? 
carson i didn't hear the first part of the question ? 
kasich i appreciate it , jeb . i'm all of you . but i want at some point to talk about a value added tax and 11 trillion , 12 trillion tax cuts that will put our kids way deeper in the hole than they have been at this point . so i would like to talk about it at some point , because that's what leadership is . 
bush do i get to do it five or six times or just once , responding to that ? 
trump let me just tell you , first of all , i've been hearing this man so long talking about putin . putin said about me i didn't say about putin putin said very nice things about me . and i say very nicely , wouldn't it be nice if actually we could get along with russia , we could get along with foreign countries , instead of spending trillions and trillions of dollars ? you're talking about flint , michigan . you're talking about places we need to rebuild the infrastructure of our country . wouldn't it be nice if we got along with the world , and maybe russia could help us in our quest to get rid of isis , et cetera , et cetera ? crosstalk 
cruz the question of whether we should toppling dictatorships is asking the wrong question . we should be defeating our enemies . so the problem with defeating . . . 
trump let me just tell you about the lenders . first of all , these lenders aren't babies . these are total killers . these are not the nice , sweet little people that you think , ok ? laughter and applause you know , i mean you're living in a world of the make believe , chris , you want to know the truth . and i had the good sense to leave atlantic city , which by the way , caesars just went bankrupt . every company , chris can tell you , every company virtually in atlantic city went bankrupt . laughter every company . and let me just tell you . i had the good sense , and i've gotten a lot of credit in the financial pages , seven years ago i left atlantic city before it totally cratered , and i made a lot of money in atlantic city , and i'm very proud of it . i want to tell you that . very , very proud of it . 
rubio i have never said that . and i have never advocated that . what i have advocated is that we pass law in this country that says all human life at every stage of its development is worthy of protection . in fact , i think that law already exists . it is called the constitution of the united states . and let me go further . i believe that every single human being is entitled to the protection of our laws , whether they can vote or not . whether they can speak or not . whether they can hire a lawyer or not . whether they have a birth certificate or not . and i think future generations will look back at this history of our country and call us barbarians for murdering millions of babies who we never gave them a chance to live . 
trump a complete disaster , yes . 
trump first of all , there's nobody on this stage that's more pro israel than i am . ok . there's nobody . i am pro israel . booing i was the grand marshall , not so long ago , of the israeli day parade down 5th avenue . i've made massive contributions to israel . i have a lot of i have tremendous love for israel . i happen to have a son in law and a daughter that are jewish , ok ? and two grandchildren that are jewish . but i will tell you , i think if we're going to ever negotiate a peace settlement , which every israeli wants , and i've spoken to the toughest and the sharpest , they all want peace , i think it would be much more helpful is i'm a negotiator . if i go in , i'll say i'm pro israel and i've told that to everybody and anybody that would listen . but i would like to at least have the other side think i'm somewhat neutral as to them , so that we can maybe get a deal done . maybe we can get a deal . i think it's probably the toughest negotiation of all time . but maybe we can get a deal done . 
rubio . . . what is your plan , mr . trump ? what is your plan on healthcare ? 
trump and you haven't excuse me , you haven't heard that . you listen to the good record in florida . you take a look at what happened , as soon as that year ended he got out , florida crashed . too much debt . he loaded it up with debt , and his spending went through the roof . crosstalk 
trump well , you know , i've been watching the debate today . and they're talking about radical islamic terrorism or radical islam . but i will tell you this . there's something going on that maybe you don't know about , maybe a lot of other people don't know about , but there's tremendous hatred . and i will stick with exactly what i said to anderson cooper . 
bush of course not . it won't have an impact on hedge funds managers paying ordinary income . in fact , it's not just hedge fund people , but people that are doing they're in the business of investing other people's money , getting capital gains treatment is not appropriate . they should be paying ordinary income . that's their business . they're grateful to be able to make a lot of money , i'm sure . and what we do is lower the rates . it's not the end of the world that private equity people and hedge fund folks that are , right now , getting capital gains treatment for the income they earn , pay ordinary income like everybody else in this room . that's not a problem at all . what we need to do is reform the tax code to simplify the rates , to shift power away from washington , d . c . that's what i did as governor of the state of florida , 19 billion dollars of tax cuts , and it stimulated seven out of the eight years . florida led the nation in job growth . 
walker . . . and as we all know . . . 
carson ruthless is not necessarily the word i would use , but tough , resolute , understanding what the problems are , and understanding that the job of the president of the united states is to protect the people of this country and to do what is necessary in order to get it done . 
trump that's wrong . they were wrong . it's the new york times , they are always wrong . 
rubio i was mentioned in the question . 
trump let me go back to the other just for a second . in large mosques , all over the middle east , you have people chanting death to the usa . now , that does not sound like a friendly act to me . as far as the families are concerned , and as far as the law is concerned , we have a law this all started with your question on water boarding . we have a law that doesn't allow right now water boarding . they have no laws . they have no rules . they have no regulations . they chop off heads . they drown 40 , 50 , 60 people at a time in big steel cages , pull them up an hour later , everyone dead . and we're working on a different set of parameters . now , we have to obey the laws . have to obey the laws . but we have to expand those laws , because we have to be able to fight on at least somewhat of an equal footing or we will never ever knock out isis and all of the others that are so bad . we better expand our laws or we're being a bunch of suckers , and they are laughing at us . they are laughing at us , believe me . 
walker . . . that failed three times in four and a half years when i got elected , because it is working . we balanced a budget . you want to talk about balanced budgets ? you took four major projects into bankruptcy over and over and over again . you can't take america into bankruptcy . that's what's wrong with the politicians in washington right now . they think we can take a country into bankruptcy . crosstalk 
cruz so , governor kasich . . . 
trump so far , i'm doing better . you know , you started off over here , jeb . you're moving over further and further . pretty soon you're going to be off the end . . . crosstalk 
kasich well , look , all i'm in favor of in ohio is high standards . first of all , let me tell you , i would take 125 federal education programs , put them in four buckets , and send them back to the states . ok , i've been working on this for many , many years . secondly , jake , in our state , the state school board sets the standards . and we want high standards because we have not always had high standards , unfortunately . they set the standards and the local school boards develop the curriculum . not only did we have that in the law , we reasserted it in the law . and we also want parental advisers in the local school district so that , in fact , you know , frankly , education has to be run at the school board level with a little guidance from the state . now on top of that , you want to talk about the 21st century and what we need to do with our kids ? we need to start connecting them to the real world . we need to be training them for the jobs of the 21st century , not the jobs of 20 years ago . we need vocational education starting in the seventh grade where kids can get that kind of education that can take them to college , but all the way through their k through 12 they ought to be connected with real world jobs . frankly , what ought to happen is we ought to get them to pursue their god given talents and connect them with the things that give them passion . and that's exactly what we're doing in ohio , combined with mentoring programs to talk to kids about what their future can be . so let me be clear , local control , obviously , high state standards . that's what it is in the state of ohio . 
rubio . . . that's false . . . 
rubio yeah . 
kasich thank you , wolf . just last weekend , just last week , a friend asked one of my daughters , do you like politics ? and my daughter said , no , i don't . and the reason i don't like it is because there's too much fighting , too much yelling . it's so loud , i don't like it . you know , i turned to my friend and i said , you know , she's really on to something . and when we think about our country and the big issues that we face in this country ; creating jobs , making sure people can keep their jobs , the need for rising wages , whether our children when they graduate from college can find a job , protecting the homeland , destroying isis , rebuilding defense . these are all the things that we need to focus on but we'll never get there if we're divided . we'll never get there if republicans and democrats just fight with one another . frankly , we are republicans and they're democrats but before all of that , we're americans . and i believe we need to unify in so many ways to rebuild our country , to strengthen our country , to rebuild our defense , and for america to secure it's place it world ; for us , for our children , and for the next generation . thank you . 
bush no . absolutely not . people are supporting me because i have a proven record of conservative leadership where i cut taxes 19 billion over eight years . we shrunk the state government workforce , we created a climate that led the nation in job growth seven out of eight years . we were one of two states to go to aaa bond rating . people know that we need principle centered leadership , a disrupter to go to washington , d . c . the one guy that had some special interests that i know of that tried to get me to change my views on something that was generous and gave me money was donald trump . he wanted casino gambling in florida 
carson the fact of the matter is , you know , what we should vet all candidates . i have no problem with being vetted . what i do have a problem with is being lied about and then putting that out there as truth . and i don't even mind that so much , if they do it about with everybody , like people on the other side . but , you know , when i look at somebody like hillary clinton , who sits there and tells her daughter and a government official that no , this was a terrorist attack , and then tells everybody else that it was a video . where i came from , they call that a lie . and . . . cheering and applause i think that's very different from , you know , somebody misinterpreting , when i said that i was offered a scholarship to west point , that is the words that they used . but , i've had many people come and say the same thing to me . that is what people do in those situations . we have to start treating people the same , and finding out what people really think and what they're made of . people who know me know that i'm an honest person . 
trump oh yeah , you're . . . 
trump here's a guy here's a guy that buys a house for 179 , 000 , he sells it to a lobbyist who's probably here for 380 , 000 and then legislation is passed . you tell me about this guy . this is what we're going to have as president . 
trump that's right . 
rubio senator cruz has called your immigration plan amnesty , and has an add out there comparing it to president obama's . he says both of you support allowing undocumented immigrants legal status here in the united states after a background check , paying a fine , and paying taxes . are those claims correct ? 
trump it's not that complicated actually . 
kasich 
trump . . . wrong . . . 
cruz i supported . . . 
trump that is so wrong . we'll work on that . i took 1 million and i turned into 10 billion . 
christie on september 10th , 2001 , i was named chief federal prosecutor in new jersey and on september 11th , 2001 , my wife and my brother who are in the audience tonight went through the world trade center and to their offices just blocks away from the trade center . i lost touch with them for six hours that day and prayed that they were alive . luckily , they were sent home . but many of our friends and others in our neighborhood lost their lives that day . terrorism radical jihadist terrorism is not theoretical to me . it's real . and for seven years , i spent my life protecting our country against another one of those attacks . you won't have to worry when i'm president of the untied states whether that can be done because i've already done it . i want the chance to do it again to protect you , your children and your families . if you give me the chance and give me your vote i will protect america from the wars that are being brought to our door step . 
bush great question . i feel like i have to get into my inner chris christie , and point out that the reason why i should be president is listening to two senators talk about arcane amendments to bills that didn't pass . this is this is the problem . we need a leader to fix this problem . and i have a detailed plan to do just that , including controlling the border , dealing with the visa over stayers , making sure that we have a path to legal status , not to citizenship , for those that come out from the shadows and pay a fine , learn english , don't commit crimes , work and pay taxes . that is the better approach . 
kasich well , you know , , of course . i mean , if look , i was involved in just being a pioneer in a new church . religious institutions should be able to practice the religion that they believe in . no question and no doubt about it . now , in regard to same sex marriage , i don't favor it . i've always favored traditional marriage , but , look , the court has ruled and i've moved on . and what i've said , hugh , is that , look , where does it end ? if you're in the business of selling things , if you're not going to sell to somebody you don't agree with , ok , today i'm not going to sell to somebody who's gay , and tomorrow maybe i won't sell to somebody who's divorced . i mean , if you're in the business of commerce , conduct commerce . that's my view . and if you don't agree with their lifestyle , say a prayer for them when they leave and hope they change their behavior . but when it comes to the religious institutions , they are in inviolate in my mind , and i would fight for those religious institutions . and look , i've appointed over a hundred judges as governor . i even appointed adjudge to the ohio supreme court . and you know what they are ? they're conservatives . go check it out . they are conservatives . they don't make the law . they interpret the law . that's all they do . and they stick by the constitution . so i will do that . but let's just not get so narrow here as to gotcha this or that . i think my position is clear . 
trump yes , i might feel more comfortable . i would say that i would and i have a permit , which is very unusual in new york a permit to carry . and i do carry on occasion , sometimes a lot . but i like to be unpredictable so that people don't know exactly . . . laughter 
kasich not just talk , but a record of achievement . that's how we'll restore credibility . . 
trump i think the big problem this country has is being politically correct . i've been challenged by so many people , and i don't frankly have time for total political correctness . and to be honest with you , this country doesn't have time either . this country is in big trouble . we don't win anymore . we lose to china . we lose to mexico both in trade and at the border . we lose to everybody . and frankly , what i say , and oftentimes it's fun , it's kidding . we have a good time . what i say is what i say . and honestly megyn , if you don't like it , i'm sorry . i've been very nice to you , although i could probably maybe not be , based on the way you have treated me . but i wouldn't do that . but you know what , we we need strength , we need energy , we need quickness and we need brain in this country to turn it around . that , i can tell you right now . 
trump wait a minute , carly . wait . i let you speak . atlantic city is a disaster , and i did great in atlantic city . i knew when to get out . my timing was great . and i got a lot of credit for it . many of the great business people that you know and carl icon ph is going to work with me on making great deals for this country . but whether it's carl or so many others that we read about all the time 
trump . . . we'll find out when we have the inaudible . . . 
trump john , in life you have flexibility . you do have flexibility . when you're fighting wars , you're going one way , you have a plan . it's a beautiful plan . it can't lose . the enemy makes a change , and all of a sudden you have to change . you have to have flexibility . in ronald reagan , though , in terms of what we're talking about , was the great example . he was a somewhat liberal democrat who became a somewhat , pretty strong conservative . he became most importantly , he became a great president . he made many of the changes that i've made i mean , i've seen as i grew up , i've seen , and as i get older and wiser , and i feel that i am a conservative . now , i also feel i'm a common sense conservative , because some of the views i don't agree with . and i think a lot of people agree with me , obviously , based on what's happening . 
trump so conservatives actually do come out of manhattan , including william f . buckley and others , just so you understand . and just so if i could , because he insulted a lot of people . i've had more calls on that statement that ted made new york is a great place . it's got great people , it's got loving people , wonderful people . when the world trade center came down , i saw something that no place on earth could have handled more beautifully , more humanely than new york . you had two one hundred . . . . . . you had two 110 story buildings come crashing down . i saw them come down . thousands of people killed , and the cleanup started the next day , and it was the most horrific cleanup , probably in the history of doing this , and in construction . i was down there , and i've never seen anything like it . and the people in new york fought and fought and fought , and we saw more death , and even the smell of death nobody understood it . and it was with us for months , the smell , the air . and we rebuilt downtown manhattan , and everybody in the world watched and everybody in the world loved new york and loved new yorkers . and i have to tell you , that was a very insulting statement that ted made . 
trump can i tell you what ? it will never happen because they'll let their currency go up . they're never going to let it happen . japan , the same thing . they are devaluing it's so impossible for you look at caterpillar tractor and what's happening with caterpillar and kamatsu . kamatsu is a tractor company in japan . friends of mine are ordering kamatsu tractors now because they've de valued the yen to such an extent that you can't buy a caterpillar tractor . and we're letting them get away with it and we can't let them get away with it . and that's why we have to use carl and we have to use our great businesspeople and not political hacks to negotiate with these guys . 
rubio well , let me say , i know that a lot of people find appeal in the things donald says cause he says what people wish they could say . the problem is , presidents can't just say anything they want . it has consequences , here and around the world . and so let me give you one . two days ago , i met this extraordinary couple who were on furlough because they are missionaries in bangladesh . it's a very tough place to be a missionary . it's muslim . and their safety and security very much relies upon friendly muslims that live along side them , that may not convert , but protect them and certainly look out for them . and their mission field really are muslims that are looking to convert to christianity as well . and they tell me that today they have a very hostile environment in which to operate in because the news is coming out that in america , leading political figures are saying that america doesn't like muslims . so this is a real impact . there's no doubt that radical islam is a danger in the world . i can also tell you if you go to any national cemetery , especially arlington , you're going to see crescent moons there . if you go anywhere in the world you're going see american men and women serving us in uniform that are muslims . and they love america . and as far as i know , no one on this stage has served in uniform in the united states military . anyone out there that has the uniform of the united states on and is willing to die for this country is someone that loves america . no matter what their religious background may be . 
paul alright . much of the discussion is centered over whether or not the different tax plans help , or affect the middle class . in fact , it's the chief argument by democrats against many of the different flat tax proposals . mine is unique in the sense that my tax plan actually gets rid of the payroll tax as well . it shifts it to the business , and it would allow middle class people to get a tax cut . if you just cut their income tax , there isn't much income tax to cut . mine actually cuts the payroll tax , and i think it would spread the tax cut across all socioeconomic levels , and would allow then it to be something that would be broadly supported by the public in an election . 
fiorina . . . we have the strongest military on the face of the planet , and everyone has to know it . 
rubio thank you . as we near the end of this year , we enter one of the most important elections in a generation . for what's at stake in this election is not simply what party's going to be in charge . but our very identity as a people and as a nation . for over 200 years this has been a special country . a unique place where anyone from anywhere can achieve anything . but now millions of americans feel like they're being left behind . insecure in their future and unsafe in the face of terrorism . this election is about electing a president that will restore our economic vibrancy so that the american dream can expand to reach more people and change more lives than ever before . and rebuild our military and our intelligence programs so that we can remain the strongest nation on earth . tonight i ask you for your vote . if you do this , we will rebuild this country , and together we will usher in a new american century the greatest era in the history of this great land . 
bush no , i don't . and i don't believe the federal government should be involved in the creation of standards directly or indirectly , the creation of curriculum or content . it is clearly a state responsibility . i'm for higher standards . . . . . . measured in an intellectually honest way , with abundant school choice , ending social promotion . and i know how to do this because as governor of the state of florida i created the first statewide voucher program in the country , the second statewide voucher program , in the country and the third statewide voucher program in the country . and we had rising student achievement across the board , because high standards , robust accountability , ending social promotion in third grade , real school choice across the board , challenging the teachers union and beating them is the way to go . and florida's low income kids had the greatest gains inside the country . our graduation rate improved by 50 percent . that's what i'm for . 
paul may i make a response to that ? 
paul . . . john . . . 
trump i love them . i love them . 
fiorina what i think we need to stand for are solutions . i offer myself as a leader to the people of this country because i think they're looking for solutions , not lawyers arguing over laws or entertainers throwing out sound bites that draw media attention . we need to solve the problem . to solve the problem , we need to do something here at home and something over there in their caliphate . we need to deny them territory . but here at home , we need to do two fundamental things . number one , we need to recognize that technology has moved on . the patriot act was signed in 2001 , roughly . the iphone was invented in 2007 . the ipad was invented in 2011 . snapchat and twitter , all the rest of it , have been around just for several years . technology has moved on , and the terrorists have moved on with it . let me tell you a story . soon after 9 11 , i got a phone call from the nsa . they needed help . i gave them help . i stopped a truckload of equipment . i had it turned around . it was escorted by the nsa into headquarters . we need the private sector's help , because government is not innovating . technology is running ahead by leaps and bound . the private sector will help , just as i helped after 9 11 . but they must be engaged , and they must be asked . i will ask them . i know them . 
walker thanks . i'm guy with a wife and two kids , and harley . one article called me aggressively normal . i ran for governor because i was worried about my kids' future . then , i took on the big government union bosses , and we won . they tried to recall me , and we won . they target us again , and we won . we balanced the budget , cut taxes , and turned our state around with big , bold reforms . it wasn't too late for wisconsin , and it's not too late for america . that's why i ask for your vote . 
paul i met ronald reagan as a teenager , and my family , we're big supporters of him when he ran against gerald ford . it was a big deal because he was the grassroots , running against the establishment , and i'll never forget that . and , how he stood up and said , you know what , this is something new that our country needs , and our party needs . if i were president , i would try to be one who says , you know what , i'm a reagan conservative . i'm someone who believes in peace through strength , and i would try to lead the country in that way knowing that our goal is peace , and that war is the last resort , not the first resort . and , that when we go to war , we go to war in a constitutional way , which means that we have to vote on it , that war is initiated by congress , not by the president , that we go to war electively ph . that when we go to war , we don't fight with one arm tied behind our back , we fight all out to win , but then we come home . 
cruz because we've been lied to too many times . 
cruz yes , their choice is very clear . if you look to the actual record you know , donald mentioned a moment ago that he was just doing business when he was writing checks to liberal democrats . but that's not , in fact , the checks he was writing . listen , we could all understand if you write a check to a city commission because you're looking for a zoning waiver on building a building . that may be corrupt , but you could understand real estate developers doing that . 
trump yes . if you look back to iowa , ted did change his view and his stance on ethanol quite a bit . he did and at the end . not full on , but he did change his view in the hopes of maybe doing well . and you know , i think everybody knows that . it was a front page story all over the place , and he did make a change . 
trump i tell the truth , i tell the truth . 
paul well , i hate to say it , but donald trump has a bit of a point here . the case that was decided around 1900 was , people had a green card , were here legally , and they said that their children were citizens . there's never been a direct supreme court case on people who were here illegally , whether or not their kids are citizens . so it hasn't really been completely adjudicated . the 14th amendment says that those who are here and under the jurisdiction . the original author of the of the 14th amendment said on the senate floor that this was applying to slaves , and did not specifically apply to others . 
cruz well , look , i recognize it is an agonizing experience when anyone is facing a loved loved member who's been kidnapped . but at the same time , putting in place legal regimes that encourage the payment of ransom has the effect of putting a bounty on other americans . there is a reason it has been longstanding u . s . policy that we don't negotiate with terrorists , we don't pay ransoms . if you look at what president obama has done over and over again , whether it was the james bergdahl deal , which was absolutely shameful , releasing five senior taliban terrorists to bring bergdahl back , or whether it was this recent deal with iran , where , again , up to 21 terrorists or potential terrorists were were released or not prosecuted in order to bring back four americans , what that does does is it effectively puts a bounty on american servicemen and women serving abroad , on american tourists traveling abroad . and the proper approach . . . bell rings . . . is a president and commander in chief that defends this country and that goes after goes after the terrorists , rather than showing them weakness and encouraging them to target more americans . 
rubio . . . yeah , he's going to give us his plan now , right ? ok . . . 
trump . . . by the way , i agree with with what chris is saying , but , i will say this . illegal immigration is costing us more than 200 billion dollars a year just to maintain what we have . 
trump yeah . well , jeb wouldn't have known about it . 
kasich neil , neil can i say one thing about this . i'm a free trader . i support nafta . i believe in the ptt because it's important those countries in asia are interfacing against china . and we do need china donald's right about north korea . i mean the fact is , is that they need to put the pressure on and frankly we need to intercepts ships coming out of north korea so they don't proliferate all these dangerous materials . but what he's touching talking about , i think has got merit . and i'll allow putting that tariff or whatever he's saying here . . . 
rubio you did . no , you did . crosstalk 
cruz what you do . . . 
cruz they're already prepared . the only reason he's not releasing them . . . 
kasich i'll tell you what i'll tell you what i'd be willing to fight for . i'll tell you what i'd be willing to fight for . why will ph we put tax reform on the president's desk , so we can simplify this tax system ? 
trump no , i did not . no i did not . 
kasich john harwood , there's a bigger issue here . 
carson jake , can i say something about that ? 
trump let me just . . . crosstalk 
rubio the rosa parks , an everyday american that changed the course of history . 
trump yeah , finish . 
cruz well , this is another area on which donald agrees with hillary clinton and on which i disagree with them both strongly . both donald and hillary clinton want to be neutral , to use donald's word , between israel and the palestinians . let me be clear . if i'm president , america will stand unapologetically with the nation of israel . and the notion of neutrality is based upon the left buying into this moral relativism that is often pitched in the media . listen , it is not equivalent . when you have terrorist strapping dynamite around their chest , exploding and murdering innocent women and children , they are not equivalent to the idf officers protecting israel . and i will not pretend that they are . just today , iran announced they're going to pay 7 , 000 to each suicide bomber . and i would note , missing from donald's answer was anything he has done in his nearly 70 years of living defending israel . i have over and over again led the fight to defend israel , to fight for israel . and this if you want to know who will stand with israel , we ought to start with who has stood with israel when the heat was on . 
trump inaudible audited for those years . 
cruz well , listen , i've spent my entire life defending the constitution before the u . s . supreme court . and i'll tell you , i'm not going to be taking legal advice from donald trump . 
cruz absolutely yes . you know , i have spent much of my adult life enforcing the law and defending the constitution . and the problem that underlies all of this is the cronyism and corruption of washington . you know , the opening question jerry asked , would you bail out the big banks again ? nobody gave you an answer to that . i'll give you an answer . absolutely not . and what we have right now is we have washington as government gets bigger and bigger , you know , the biggest lie in all of washington and in all of politics is that republicans are the party of the rich . the truth is , the rich do great with big government . they get in bed with big government . the big banks get bigger and bigger and bigger under dodd frank and community banks are going out of business . and , by the way , the consequence of that is small businesses can't get business loans , and it is that fundamental corruption that is why six of the 10 wealthiest counties in america are in and around washington , d . c . and let me give you a contrast to washington cronyism . some weeks ago , a woman named sabina loving testified at a hearing that i chaired in the senate . sabina loving is an african american single mom who started a tax preparation business in the south side of chicago . she found a store front , she wanted to have her own business . she started a business . but then the irs promulgated new regulations targeting tax preparers . they did it under a more than 100 year old statute called the dead horse act . now , this statute and the irs in classic washington crony fashion had exemptions for lawyers and big fancy accountants , but sabina had to pay 1 , 000 an employee . it would have driven her out of business , and ms . loving sued the irs . she took the obama irs to court , and she won , and they struck down the rule for picking the big guys over the little guys . 
cruz well , look . i'll point out first of all it is a matter of public record that donald supported john kerry in 2004 over george w . bush , and he supported hillary clinton , gave her two checks in a presidential campaign in 2008 . and indeed , once she was secretary of state , he described her as one of the greatest secretaries of state in industry . and , you know , the point on the iran deal , his answer to everything is if only if someone smarter were in government , things would be better . no . we don't just need smarter people in government . we need leaders that are protecting american interests . and when it comes to iran , donald has said he would leave the agreement in place and try to renegotiate it , giving the ayatollah khomeini over 100 billion . that reflects you do not understand the radical islam terrorist that is the ayatollah that wants to murder us . we need a commander in chief that understands our enemies . . . bell rings . . . understands and doesn't give them billions of dollars to threaten our safety and security . 
paul may i respond ? may i respond ? 
rubio well , he did , and that's why trump university . . . 
trump . . . you did say it , you did say it . been reported in 10 different news . . . 
trump well , i can only say look , i can only say i've been a big contributor to israel over the years . i've received many , many awards from israel , as i've said before . i have a great relationship with israel . and i'm going to keep it that way . and if i could bring peace , that would be a fantastic thing . it would be one of my greatest achievements as president . 
walker well , the voters in wisconsin elected me last year for the third time because they wanted someone who aimed high , not aimed low . before i came in , the unemployment rate was over eight percent . it's now down to 4 . 6 percent . we've more than made up for the jobs that were lost during the recession . and the rate in which people are working is almost five points higher than it is nationally . you know , people like hillary clinton think you grow the economy by growing washington . one report last year showed that six of the top 10 wealthiest counties in america were in or around washington , d . c . . i think most of us in america understand that people , not the government creates jobs . and one of the best things we can do is get the government out of the way , repeal obamacare , put in reign in all the out of control regulations , put in place an all of the above energy policy , give people the education , the skills that the need to succeed , and lower the tax rate and reform the tax code . that's what i'll do as president , just like i did in wisconsin . 
rubio here's the bottom line . we can't get that legislation passed . the american people will not support doing anything about people that are in this country illegally until the law is enforced first , and you prove it to them . this has been abundantly clear . every effort over the last ten years to do those comprehensively has failed . and it has failed because the american people have zero trust that the federal government will enforce our laws . and that's why since then , i have said repeatedly , if you are serious about immigration reform , then the key that unlocks the door to being able to do that is not just to pass a law that says it is going to enforce the law , but to actually do it . to hire the 20 , 000 new border agents , to finish the fencing and walls , to put in place mandatory e verify , to put in place an entry exit tracking system to prevent visa overstays . and once that is in place and that's working , i believe the american people will support a very reasonable , but responsible approach to people that have been here a long time , who are not dangerous criminals , who pay taxes and pay fines for what they did . but until then , none of that is going to be possible . 
christie . . . how are you supposed to no , i'll tell you how you , look . . . 
cruz that's not what donald trump did . donald trump supported jimmy carter over ronald reagan . donald supported john kerry over george w . bush . if you don't like obamacare , donald trump funded harry reid and nancy pelosi taking over congress to pass obamacare . on immigration , if you don't like amnesty , if you don't like the gang of eight , donald trump funded five of the eight members of the gang of eight 50 , 000 . and let's talk about this election . the choice republican primary voters are making is who is best prepared to stand up to hillary clinton and beat hillary clinton . donald trump has written checks to hillary clinton not once , not twice , not three times . ten times . and four of those checks were not to her senate campaign . it wasn't that she was the new york senator and it was a cost of doing business . it was to her presidential campaign . donald trump in 2008 wrote four checks to elect hillary clinton as president . 
trump . . . that's not right . . . 
trump as i said , we are spending 200 billion we are spending 200 billion a year on maintaining what we have . we will move them out . the great ones will come back , the good ones will come back . they'll be expedited , they'll be back , they'll come back legally . we'll have a country they'll come back , legally . 
trump according to your poll . . . crosstalk 
cruz well look . we're certainly hopeful that the violence will cease , but there's reason to be highly skeptical . russia has enhanced its position because of obama's weakness in the middle east , weakness in syria . and you know , as we're headed to november , we need no nominate a republican candidate that can lay out a clear difference with both barack obama and hillary clinton on foreign policy . one of the real challenges with both donald and senator rubio is that they have agreed over and over again with both hillary clinton and barack obama . so for example , in libya , both of them agreed with the obama clinton policy of toppling the government in libya . that was a disaster . it gave the country over to radical islamic terrorism and it endangered america . another example is john kerry . john kerry senator rubio voted to confirm john kerry as secretary of state . i voted against him . and donald trump supported john kerry against george w . bush in 2004 , gave him a check . and john kerry has been the most anti israel secretary of state this country has ever seen . his diplomacy has been a disaster . and if we nominate someone who agreed with john kerry , barack obama and hillary clinton on foreign policy , we're not in a strong position to win the general election . 
huckabee i would certainly love to get in on this , because i think the single . . . crosstalk 
trump no . i am a 2nd amendment person . if we had guns in california on the other side where the bullets went in the different direction , you wouldn't have 14 or 15 people dead right now . if even in paris , if they had guns on the other side , going in the opposite direction , you wouldn't have 130 people plus dead . so the answer is no and what jeb said is absolutely correct . we have a huge mental health problem in this country . we're closing hospitals , we're closing wards , we're closing so many because the states want to save money . we have to get back into looking at what's causing it . the guns don't pull the trigger . it's the people that pull the trigger and we have to find out what is going on . we have to protect our 2nd amendment and you cannot do this and certainly what barack obama was doing with the executive order . he doesn't want to get people together , the old fashioned way , where you get congress . you get the congress , you get the senate , you get together , you do legislation . he just writes out an executive order . not supposed to happen that way . 
trump i will . first of all , i think and i know the h1b very well . and it's something that i frankly use and i shouldn't be allowed to use it . we shouldn't have it . very , very bad for workers . and second of all , i think it's very important to say , well , i'm a businessman and i have to do what i have to do . when it's sitting there waiting for you , but it's very bad . it's very bad for business in terms of and it's very bad for our workers and it's unfair for our workers . and we should end it . very importantly , the disney workers endorsed me , as you probably read . and i got a full endorsement because they are the ones that said , and they had a news conference , and they said , he's the only one that's going to be able to fix it . because it is a mess . i think for a period of a year to two years we have to look back and we have to see , just to answer the second part of your question , where we are , where we stand , what's going on . we have to sort of take a strong , good , hard look and come up with plans that work . and we're rushing into things , and we're just we're leading with the chin . bell rings we're leading with people that don't know what they are doing in terms of our leadership . i'd say a minimum of one year , maybe two years . 
trump i cannot say . i have to respect the person that , if it's not me , the person that wins , if i do win , and i'm leading by quite a bit , that's what i want to do . i can totally make that pledge . if i'm the nominee , i will pledge i will not run as an independent . but and i am discussing it with everybody , but i'm , you know , talking about a lot of leverage . we want to win , and we will win . but i want to win as the republican . i want to run as the republican nominee . 
rubio well then , make them in america . 
cruz maria . . . 
trump i'll tell you . i was running 
trump i wish it was always this easy as you , jeb . 
trump but just in in little sections . 
rubio . . . ok . i was mentioned just because of the hispanic and i'll be brief . a couple points , number one , i do think it's amazing that on this stage tonight there are two descendants of cuban origin , and an african american . we are the party of diversity , not the democratic party . cheering and applause and , the second point i would make is that we have to move past this idea that somehow the hispanic community only cares about immigration . yes , it's an important issue because we know and love people that have been impacted by it . but , i'm going to tell you that the most powerful sentiment in the hispanic community , as it is in every immigrant community , is the burning desire to leave your children better off than yourself . . . bell ringing . . . and , you can only do that through free enterprise . that's what we stand for , not socialism like bernie sanders , and increasingly hillary clinton . 
rubio then why don't you tonight say you're going to give the money back to everybody who wants . . . 
trump . . . 44 million give me a break . crosstalk 
trump other than that we'll go with rosa parks . i like that . 
fiorina it's the only way to level the playing field between big and powerful and small and powerless . 
trump thank you very much , i appreciate it . 
kasich when you talk about regime change , wolf , it means regime change . that's what it means . even though there's so much chaos in north korea right now , there's a lot of reports of uncertainty , and instability in that government . but , look , here's what i think we ought to do like , immediately . and , we've been kicking the can down the road on this for , i don't know , 15 years . we should be intercepting the ships that are leaving north korea so they're not selling this material , or this technology , or giving it to someone else . secondly , the same goes with the aircraft . thirdly , we need to slap even tougher sanctions on north korea because we really don't have the toughest sanctions on north korea . we ought to talk about arming south korea with ballistic missile technology . and , of course , also japan with ballistic missile technology . because we're now starting to take a firm position . we have the attention of the chinese . the chinese are the best way to calm that regime down and get them in a position of where they back off . but , when i say regime change , i don't have to talk exactly what that means . look , i've been involved in national security for a long time . you don't have to spell everything out , but what i'm telling you is you look for any means you can to be able to solve that problem in north korea , and in the meantime put the pressure on the chinese . and , what we're doing is beginning to work against them . they are the key to being able to settle this situation . 
kasich yeah , i would like to make a comment . 
paul the remark was made that there hadn't been anyone else on the podium opposed to the iraq war . i've made my career as being an opponent of the iraq war . i was opposed to the syria war . i was opposed to arming people who are our enemies . iran is now stronger because hussein is gone . hussein was the great bulwark and counterbalance to the iranians . so when we complain about the iranians , you need to remember that the iraq war made it worse . originally , governor bush was asked , was the iraq war a mistake , and he said , no . we'd do it again . we have to learn sometimes the interventions backfire . the iraq war backfired and did not help us . we're still paying the repercussions of a bad decision . 
rubio hey , charlie . . . crosstalk 
paul i think this goes back to essentially what we've been saying for the last two or three questions . carly fiorina also said we're not going to talk with putin . well , think if reagan had said that during the cold war ? we continued to talk with the russians throughout the cold war which is much more significant that where we are now . should we continue to talk with iran ? yes . should we cut up the agreement immediately ? that's absurd . wouldn't you want to know if they complied ? now , i'm going to vote against the agreement because i don't think there's significant leverage , but it doesn't mean that i would immediately not look at the agreement , and cut it up without looking to see if whether or not iran has complied . the same goes with china . i don't think we need to be rash , i don't think we need to be reckless , and i think need to leave lines of communication open . often we talk about whether we should be engaged in the world , or disengaged in the world , and i think this is an example of some who want to isolate us , actually , and not be engaged . we do need to be engaged with russia . it doesn't mean we give them a free pass , or china a free pass , but , to be engaged , to continue to talk . we did throughout the cold war , and it would be a big mistake not to do it here . 
trump the 45 percent tax is a threat . it was not a tax , it was a threat . it will be a tax if they don't behave . take china as an example . i have many friends , great manufacturers , they want to go into china . they can't . china won't let them . we talk about free trade . it's not tree free trade , it's stupid trade . china dumps everything that they have over here . no tax , no nothing , no problems , no curfews , no anything . we can't get into china . i have the best people , manufacturers , they can't get in . when they get in , they have to pay a tremendous tax . the 45 percent is a threat that if they don't behave , if they don't follow the rules and regulations so that we can have it equal on both sides , we will tax you . it doesn't have to be 45 , it could be less . but it has to be something because our country and our trade and our deals and most importantly our jobs are going to hell . 
rubio well , can i just clarify something ? 
cruz . . . on the issue of citizenship , donald , i'm not going to use your mother's birth against you . 
trump i will know . . . 
bush jane horton is sitting with my wife here today . her husband , chris , was killed in action in afghanistan . and jane spends her time now defending and fighting for military families . they're both heroes . i don't think we need an agitator in chief or a divider in chief . we need a commander in chief that will rebuild our military and restore respect to our veterans by revamping and fixing a broken veterans administration , that's my pledge to you . i ask for your support . thank you . 
cruz well , let me tell you , dana , number one , i'm proud to stand for life . these planned parenthood videos are horrifying . i would encourage every american to watch the videos . see seeing your planned parenthood officials callously , heartlessly bartering and selling the body parts of human beings , and then ask yourself , are these my values ? these are horrifying . on these videos , planned parenthood also essentially confesses to multiple felonies . it is a felony with ten years' jail term to sell the body parts of unborn children for profit . that's what these videos show planned parenthood doing . absolutely we shouldn't be sending 500 million of taxpayer money to funding an ongoing criminal enterprise , and i'll tell you , the fact that republican leadership in both houses has begun this discussion by preemptively surrendering to barack obama and saying , we'll give in because obama threatens a veto . you know , obama's committed to his principles . his liberal principles , he will fight for them . he says . . . 
christie well , i've been pretty helpful to the pro life cause in one of the most pro choice states in the union . i've stood up for the first time and now for the last six years we've de funded planned parenthood , not talked about it like they do in washington d . c . but for six years as governor , planned parenthood does not receive that funding from the state budget anymore ; over 50 million worth of money that's been saved now , that is not going to do exactly what hillary clinton wants to have done and has advocated for . she believes that organization , which engages in the systematic murder of children in the womb , in order to maximize the value of their body parts for sale on the open market , is an acceptable position . let me tell you something , i don't care if you are a millennial or whether you are in your 90s , no one is for that type of activity , unless you are the most radical type of extremist on this issue , like senator clinton and her party is on this issue . i'll say one other thing . the fact is , that i believe that if a woman has been raped , that is a birth and a pregnancy that she should be able to terminate . if she is the victim of incest this is not a woman's choice . this is a woman being violated . and the fact is that we have always has believed , as has ronald reagan , that we have self defense for women who have been raped and impregnated because of it , or the subject of incest and been impregnated for it . that woman should not have to deliver that child if they believe that violation is now an act of self defense by terminating that pregnancy . 
carson well , there's no question that isis is a very serious problem , and i don't believe that this administration recognizes how serious it is . i think we need to do a lot more than we're doing . recognize that the caliphate is what gives them the legitimacy to go out on a jihadist mission , so we need to take that away from them . the way to take that away from them is to talk to our military officials and ask them , what do you need in order to accomplish this goal ? our decision is , then , do we give them what we need . i say , yes , not only do we give them what they need , but we don't tie their hands behind their backs so that they can go ahead and get the job done . in addition to that . . . . . . in addition to that , we go ahead and we take the oil from them , their source of revenue . you know , some of these these engagement rules that the administration has we're not going to bomb a tanker that's coming out of there because there might be a person in it give me a break . just tell them that , you put people in there , we're going to bomb them . so don't put people in there if you don't want them bombed . you know , that's so simple . and then we need to shut down we need to shut down their mechanisms of funding and attack their command and control centers . why should we let their people be sitting there smoking their cigars , sitting in their comfortable chairs in raqqa ? we know to go ahead and shut off the supply routes , and send in our special ops at 2 00 a . m . and attack them everywhere they go . they should be running all the time , then they won't have time to plan attacks against us . 
rubio i don't know of any problem in america that's going to be fixed with a tax increase . we have an economy today , an economy today that is not creating jobs that pay enough . and one of the reasons why is because we have one of the most expensive business tax rates on the planet . our combined business rate puts us among the highest in the industrialized world . and then on top of that , we are the only one that has a worldwide system of taxation , where an american company who makes money abroad has to pay taxes where they made the money and then taxes a second time when they bring it back . the combination of these two things has stranded over 2 trillion , the equivalent of the size of the russian economy , 2 trillion of american corporate money stranded overseas , combined with all of these inversions of companies leaving us . the solution to the problems we have today are not a tax increase . it is to lower our taxes on both people and on companies , so we can make america globally competitive again . 
trump . . . that national poll excuse me . . . 
kasich . . . yeah , well . . . 
bush i'm talking right now . i'm talking . 
rubio this is not a game . 
kasich well , we've got to to step up the pressure . and by the way , i've gotta say , after being here , every one of my 100 town hall meetings in new hampshire were a lot more fun than what i saw here today , were so much more positive . look , in terms of north korea , martha , we have to make sure that we intercept both the ships and their aircraft , because what they're trying to do is to proliferate this very dangerous material , along with the with the technology , the instruments that can be used for mass destruction . that's what i worry about the most , frankly , is non state actors , people who don't have a uniform , people don't have a country , who can spread this , who are not subject to the to the mutual assured defense . in other words , you strike us , we strike you . some of these radicals , they don't care about that . that's what i worry about , for my children , and for their children , going forward . so , we have to be very tough . and we should tell the chinese , look , if you're not going to do this ballistic missile defense to the koreans , ballistic missile defense to japan and by the way , we should impose the same kind of sanctions on north korea that we imposed on iran , because they're able to shift money . they're able to send money and receive money . bell rings we've gotta to be very tough on this . and frankly , i think we could have i think we could have let the japanese know that if you want to take action on that on that missile that's rising , you want to take action you will have our support , if that's what you think is the best thing to do . we cannot continue to be weak in the face of the north koreans , or , frankly , in the entire rest of the world . martha , this is this is the relates . . . 
carson well , first of all , recognize it is a substantial problem . but like all of our problems , there isn't a single one that can't be solved with common sense if you remove the ego and the politics . and clearly , what we need to do is get a group of experts together , including people from other countries , some of our friends from israel , who have had experience screening these people and come up with new guidelines for immigration , and for visas , for people who are coming into this country . that is the thing that obviously makes sense , we can do that . and as far as the syrians are concerned , al hasakah province , perfect place . they have infrastructure . all we need to do is protect them , they will be in their own country . and that is what they told me when i was in jordan in november . let's listen to them and let's not listen to our politicians . 
huckabee the military is not a social experiment . the purpose of the military is kill people and break things . it's not to transform the culture by trying out some ideas that some people think would make us a different country and more diverse . the purpose is to protect america . i'm not sure how paying for transgender surgery for soldiers , sailors , airmen , marines makes our country safer . we've reduced the military by 25 percent . . . . . . under president obama . the disaster is that we've forgotten why we have a military . the purpose of it is to make sure that we protect every american , wherever that american is , and if an american is calling out for help , whether it's in benghazi or at the border , then we ought to be able to answer it . we've not done that because we've decimated our military . we're flying b 52s . the most recent one that was put in service was november of 1962 . a lot of the b 52s we're flying , we've only got 44 that are in service combat ready , and the fact is , most of them are older than me . and that's pretty scary . laughter and applause 
cruz well , sure , you put your finger on what the problem is . the current system isn't fair . washington is fundamentally corrupt . there are more words in the irs code than there are in the bible and and not a one of them is as good . laughter every one of them reflects a carve out or a subsidy , and it's all about empowering the washington cartel . my simple flat tax says that , for a family of four , for the first 36 , 000 you earn , you pay no taxes whatsoever . no income taxes , no payroll taxes , no nothing . above that , every american pays 10 percent across the board a flat , fair tax . which means that no longer do you have hedge fund billionaires paying a lower tax rate than their secretaries . on the business side , i've got a business flat tax of 16 percent again , that applies across the board . right now , with our corporate income tax , giant corporations with armies of accountants regularly are paying little to no taxes while small businesses are getting hammered . this is fair and across the board . now , you ask , how do the numbers add up ? i would encourage folks , if you go to our website , tedcruz . org , we have the specific numbers on the website . this plan eliminates the payroll tax , eliminates the death tax , eliminates the corporate income tax , and it abolishes the irs . and the effect of that is incredible economic growth . it means every income group will see double digit increases , from the very poorest to the very weakest , of at least 14 percent . so if you're a single mom , if you're making 40 , 000 a year , what that means is an extra about 5 , 000 in your pocket to provide for your kids , to make ends meet . it has a powerful , powerful effect . and there's one other really powerful feature of my plan , which is that it's border adjustable . which means , if you're an exporter if you're a farmer , if you're a rancher , if you're a manufacturer , you don't pay the businesses flat tax . exports are free of that tax , but all imports pay that 16 percent business flat tax , which means this tax plan would cause jobs to boom , and it would let america compete with china and the world on a level playing field . 
trump neil , the problem . . . 
bush that's that's my brother . 
rubio if i may respond to that . 
cruz hold on , wolf . you said i got a response . 
carson i think allowing terrorist to get away with things is bad for america . you know , we have the we have a constitution . we have a fourth amendment . it guards us against illegal and unreasonable search and seizure . but we have mechanisms in place with the judicial system that will allow us to gain material that is necessary to benefit the nation as a whole or the community as a whole . and that's why we have fisa courts and things of that nature . so absolutely , i would i would expect apple to comply with the court order . if they don't comply with that , you're encouraging chaos in our system . 
kasich you know , obviously , as president of the united states , we've got to keep the people safe . that's first and foremost . but as governor of ohio , i have an obligation to keep the 11 . 5 million people in ohio safe . and we have been very effective with our joint terrorism task force , being able to make busts . in fact , we just made one three four weeks ago against a person who was favorable to isis living in akron . but let me tell you what is interesting about the administration . we had central american miners that were placed in ohio , and we never knew a thing about it . we didn't know where they were . and , in fact , we know now that some of them , there is a case going on where some of them may have been human trafficked . so when the administration tells me we have a great vetting process , the proof is in the pudding . they sent these miners to us . our schools were disrupted . we didn't know where they were . and bad things happened to them . and now they tell me that we ought to be able to admit these syrian refugees . so , wolf , look , people have accused me at times of having too big of a heart . you know , that's ok . but i have to also to say i must keep the people of my state safe . so we take a pause . 
trump i funded you . i funded him . can you believe it ? 
carson well , you know , when i say tithing , i'm talking about the concept of proportionality . 
cruz i want to talk to every soldier and sailor and airman and marine . i want to talk to every mom and dad and sister and brother and son and daughter of someone fighting for this country . for seven years , you've had a commander in chief that doesn't believe in you , that sends you into combat with rules of engagement that tie your arms behind your back . that is wrong . it is immoral . and in january 2017 , it will end . i want to also talk to all the police officers and firefighters and first responders who have been left behind with this president . starting in january 2017 , i will have your back . 
paul if you want a skeptic if you want a skeptic , jake , i will happily jump into that briar patch . if you want a real . . . 
trump well , first of all , i think we need somebody absolutely that we can trust , who is totally responsible ; who really knows what he or she is doing . that is so powerful and so important . and one of the things that i'm frankly most proud of is that in 2003 , 2004 , i was totally against going into iraq because you're going to destabilize the middle east . i called it . i called it very strongly . and it was very important . but we have to be extremely vigilant and extremely careful when it comes to nuclear . nuclear changes the whole ball game . frankly , i would have said get out of syria ; get out if we didn't have the power of weaponry today . the power is so massive that we can't just leave areas that 50 years ago or 75 years ago we wouldn't care . it was hand to hand combat . the biggest problem this world has today is not president obama with global warming , which is inconceivable , this is what he's saying . the biggest problem we have is nuclear nuclear proliferation and having some maniac , having some madman go out and get a nuclear weapon . that's in my opinion , that is the single biggest problem that our country faces right now . 
trump . . . they blew up , wait a minute . . . audience reaction . . . they blew up a russian airplane . he cannot be in love with these people . he's going in , and we can go in , and everybody should go in . as far as the ukraine is concerned , we have a group of people , and a group of countries , including germany tremendous economic behemoth why are we always doing the work ? we are i'm all for protecting ukraine and working but , we have countries that are surrounding the ukraine that aren't doing anything . they say , keep going , keep going , you dummies , keep going . protect us . . . bell ringing . . . and we have to get smart . we can't continue to be the policeman of the world . we are 19 trillion dollars , we have a country that's going to hell , we have an infrastructure that's falling apart . our roads , our bridges , our schools , our airports , and we have to start investing money in our country . 
rubio well , thank you . this election , we have to decide the identity of america in the 2ist century , but as part of this primary , we have to find out our identity as a party and as a movement . thirty six years ago , ronald reagan and george h . w . bush began the reagan revolution . for a generation , they defined conservatism as limited government and free enterprise and a strong national defense . but they also appealed to our hopes and our dreams . now we have to decide if we are still that kind of party and still that kind of movement , or if we're simply going to become a party that preys on people's angers and fears . i hope we remain that conservative movement that appeals to our hopes and our dreams and the belief that america will always be better in its future than it's been in its story history . 
cruz maria , i'd just like to say . . . crosstalk 
cruz i'm ted cruz . i am the son of an irish italian mom and a cuban immigrant dad who fled oppression and came to america seeking freedom . i'm a husband to my best friend , heidi , who's here tonight . i'm a dad to two little girls who are the loves of my life , caroline and catherine . if you're fed up with washington , if you're looking for someone to stand up to career politicians in both parties , i'm the only one on this stage who has done that over and over again , and if we stand together , we can bring america back . 
rubio you know , america doesn't owe me anything . i have a debt to america i'll never repay . this isn't just the country i was born in , this is the nation that literally changed the history of my family . my parents in this country were able to give me the chance to do all the things they never did . we call that the american dream , although , it's built on the universal dream of a better life . the fact that it's happened for so many people here throughout our history , that's what makes us special . but , now for millions of americans , it's slipping away . and , we have a government and leaders in government that are completely out of touch , and that's why i'm running for president . because we can't just save the american dream , we can expand it to reach more people , and change more lives than ever before . and , that's why tonight i'm asking you for your vote . 
kasich but the point is that we all have solutions . mr . trump is touching a nerve because people want the wall to be built . they want to see an end to illegal immigration . they want to see it , and we all do . but we all have different ways of getting there . and you're going to hear from all of us tonight about what our ideas are . 
rubio well , my brother's a veteran . we're very proud of him in our family . he served as a green beret in the 7th special forces from 1968 through 1971 . and as part of his training , he jumped out of an airplane and he lost his two front teeth . and for years , he's had to go to get these dental claims . and every times he goes to get one of these dental claims filled , the v . a . asks him , well , how do we know you lost your teeth in the army ? and he says , well , it's the only time i ever jumped out of a plane . laughter but he's had to fight through this process , and i've watched it firsthand . that's why i'm proud that i worked in a bipartisan way . we passed the v . a . accountability bill that , for the first time , allows us to fire allows the v . a . secretary to fire someone who's not doing a good job , who's a senior executive . and the governor's right . they've only fired three people up to now . more people will be fired if i'm president . but the portability part of it is incredibly important . veterans should be able to take their v . a . benefits to any hospital or any doctor they want to go to . when i am president of the united states , veterans will be able to take their benefits to any hospital or doctor that they choose . 
rubio let me say , i read that editorial today with a great amusement . it's actually evidence of the bias that exists in the american media today . 
carson typically , politicians do things that are politically expedient . and they are looking for whatever their particular goal is . that is not the reason that i have gotten into this thing . i'm extraordinary concerned about the direction of this country , the divisiveness that is going on , fiscal irresponsibility , the failure to take a leadership position in the world . all of those things will lead to a situation where the next generation will not have a chance that we've had now . so i don't i don't want to really get into describing who's a politician and who's not a politician , but i think the people have kind of made that decision for themselves already , and will continue to do so as time goes on . 
kasich . . . when we join together . thank you , hugh . 
bush she is . she's fantastic . 
trump i have employed tens of thousands of people . crosstalk you haven't employed one person . 
trump . . . when they got the information it became an a . . . 
rubio here's the bottom line . i'm not my campaign is going to be about the future of america , it's not going to be about attacking anyone else on this stage . i will continue to have tremendous admiration and respect for governor bush . i'm not running against governor bush , i'm not running against anyone on this stage . i'm running for president because there is no way we can elect hillary clinton to continue the policies of barack obama . 
fiorina secretariat . 
bush this relates to the strategic patience of the obama administration . they come up with these great marketing terms , and what they do is they pull back , and voids are filled , and they're now filled by asymmetric threats of terror , as well as nation states on the run . the next president of the united states is gonna have to get the united states back in the game , and if a preemptive strike is necessary to keep us safe , then we should do it . 
trump yes . 
trump . . . built an unbelievable company worth billions and billions of dollars . i don't have to hear from this man , believe me . i don't have to hear from him . 
bush you know what ? as it relates to my brother , there's one thing i know for sure . he kept us safe . i don't know if you remember . . . . . . donald . . . . . . you remember the the rumble ? you remember the fire fighter with his arms around it ? he sent a clear signal that the united states would be strong and fight islamic terrorism , and he did keep us safe . 
cruz . . . that you didn't tell them you're misleading the american people . if that's the case . . . 
carson well , putting the special ops people in there is better than not having them there , because they that's why they're called special ops , they're actually able to guide some of the other things that we're doing there . and what we have to recognize is that putin is trying to really spread his influence throughout the middle east . this is going to be his base . and we have to oppose him there in an effective way . we also must recognize that it's a very complex place . you know , the chinese are there , as well as the russians , and you have all kinds of factions there . what we've been doing so far is very ineffective , but we can't give up ground right there . but we have to look at this on a much more global scale . we're talking about global jihadists . and their desire is to destroy us and to destroy our way of life . so we have to be saying , how do we make them look like losers ? because that's the way that they're able to gather a lot of influence . and i think in order to make them look like losers , we have to destroy their caliphate . and you look for the easiest place to do that ? it would be in iraq . and if outside of anbar in iraq , there's a big energy field . take that from them . take all of that land from them . we could do that , i believe , fairly easily , i've learned from talking to several generals , and then you move on from there . but you have to continue to face them , because our goal is not to contain them , but to destroy them before they destroy us . 
rubio well , when people talk about interrogating terrorists , they're acting like this is some sort of law enforcement function . law enforcement is about gathering evidence to take someone to trial , and convict them . anti terrorism is about finding out information to prevent a future attack so the same tactics do not apply . and , it is true , we should not be discussing in a wide spread way the exact tactics that we're going to use because that allows terrorist to know to practice how to evade us . but , here's the bigger problem with all this , we're not interrogating anybody right now . guantanamo's being emptied by this president . we should be putting people into guantanamo , not emptying it out , and we shouldn't be releasing these killers who are rejoining the battlefield against the united states . 
christie good evening . 
rubio that is accurate . three times he voted against the defense authorization act , which is a bill that funds the troops . it also , by the way , funds the iron dome and other important programs . and i have to assume that if you vote against it in the senate , you would also veto it as president . he has also supported , by the way , a budget that is called the containment budget . and it is a budget that would radically reduce the amount of money we spend on our military . you can't carpet bomb isis if you don't have planes and bombs to attack them with . and if we continue those cuts that we're doing now , not to mention additional cuts , we are going to be left with the oldest and the smallest air force this country has ever had , and that leaves us less safe . 
trump we have to make our military bigger , better , stronger than ever before so that nobody messes with us , and a long run , it's going to save us . i agree with marco , i agree with ted , we have no choice . and , i can tell you this with certainty . we all have a different tax plan . some i don't totally agree with . one thing we understand , each one of those tax plans is better than the mess that we have right now . 
rubio a deal is not a deal when you're dealing with terrorists . have you ever negotiated with terrorists ? 
bush not very far . i think we need to do this state by state . there are places that get this right , and we need to make sure that we protect the privacy laws . this is a complicated place . but i do think the natural impulse on the left hillary clinton , immediately after one of these horrific violent acts took place , immediately said we need to have federal gun laws . president obama almost reflexively always says the same thing . and the net result is , you're going to take away rights of of law abiding citizens , the 99 . 999 percent of the people that are law abiding citizens . that's not the right approach to do it . in florida , we have a background check . we have concealed weapon permit holders , and in fact , there's 1 , 200 , 000 of them . we have a reduction in violent crime because we put people behind bars when they use a gun in the commission of the crime . that's the better approach . but we're living in a society today where despair kind of grows in isolation . 
kasich . . . mr . baker , everybody got to talk about taxes . . . 
bush well first of all , the idea that somehow we're better off today than the day that barack obama was inaugurated president of the united states is totally an alternative universe . the simple fact is that the world has been torn asunder . think about it . with grandiose language , the president talks about red lines and nothing to follow it up ; talks about isis being the jv team , they form a caliphate the size of indiana with 35 thousand to 40 , 000 battle tested terrorists . he's missing the whole point , that america's leadership in the world is required for peace and stability . in the crowd today is major general james livingston , who's the co chairman of my campaign here in south carolina , a medal of honor recipient . i've learned from him that what we need to achieve is peace through strength , which means we need to rebuild the military . in this administration , every weapon system has been gutted , in this administration , the force levels are going down to a level where we can't even project force . our friends no longer think we have their back and our enemies no longer fear us , and we're in a much difficult we're in a much different position than we should be . and for the life of me , i have no understanding why the president thinks that everything is going well . terrorism is on the run , china , russia is advancing their agenda at warp speed , and we pull back . as president of the united states , i will be a commander in chief that will have the back of the military . we will rebuild the military to make sure that it is a solid force , not to be the world's policeman , but to make sure that in a peaceful world , people know that the united states is there to take care of our own national interests and take care of our allies . 
bush . . . why would they worry about it . . . 
walker well , thanks , megyn . i'm certainly an imperfect man . and it's only by the blood of jesus christ that i've been redeemed from my sins . so i know that god doesn't call me to do a specific thing , god hasn't given me a list , a ten commandments , if you will , of things to act on the first day . what god calls us to do is follow his will . and ultimately that's what i'm going to try to do . and i hope people've seen it in my state , even in the big challenges i took on when i had over 100 , 000 protesters in and around our capital , trying to do what i thought was the right thing . it wasn't just how i took on those political battles . it was ultimately how i acted . not responding in kind . not lashing out . but just being decent going forward and living my life in a way that would be a testimony to him and our faith . 
cruz well , donald is right , for example , he was just talking about international trade . he's right about the problems . but his solutions don't work . so , for example , his solution on international trade , he proposed earlier a 45 percent tariff on foreign goods . now he backed away from that immediately and he may come back with a different number tonight . i don't know where he'll be tonight . but i'll tell you what happens . you know , we've seen prior presidential candidates who proposed massive tariffs , you know , smoot hawley led to the great depression . and the effect of a 45 percent tariff would be when you go to the store , when you go to walmart , when you are shopping for your kids , the prices you pay go up 45 percent . but not only that , when you put those in place , because a tariff is a tax on you , the american people , but the response of that is that the countries we trade with put in their own tariffs . a much better solution that works is the tax plan i've laid out which would enable our exports to be tax free , would tax our imports , would not raise prices for americans , and would not result in reciprocal tariffs . fix the problem and that's what's missing from what donald says . 
rubio no , he . . . 
cruz don , the reasoned principle matters . the reasoned principle matters , sadly was illustrated by the first questions today . the next president is going to appoint one , two , three , four supreme court justices . if donald trump is president , he will appoint liberals . if donald trump is president , your second amendment will gone . . . crosstalk 
fiorina but you you would stipulate , mr . trump , but not everyone agrees with you . 
rubio well , make them in america . 
kasich . . . one more time , in ohio , our wages are growing faster than the national average . we've cut taxes , balanced budgets , changed the regulatory environment . folks , you want to 
cruz in this case it's both . but if i could answer the question . . . 
trump no . i never do that . i would not do that . i don't think i have too much respect if i deal with you off the record , if i deal with bret or chris off the record , i have too much respect for that process to say , just release everything . i would not do that . 
trump i did . 
christie chris . . . 
trump that i can tell you . crosstalk 
cruz let me tell you how that question . . . crosstalk 
trump good evening . 
cruz it is true that after george w . bush nominated john roberts , i supported his confirmation . that was a mistake and i regret that . i wouldn't have nominated john roberts , and indeed , governor bush pointed out why . it wasn't that the president bushes wanted to appoint a liberal to the court , it's that it was the easier choice . both david souter and john roberts , they didn't have a long paper trail . if you had nominated edith jones or mike ludig ph you would have had a bloody fight and they weren't willing to spend political capital to put a strong judicial conservative on the court . i have spent my entire life , starting from clerking for chief justice william rehnquist on the united states supreme court , one of the most principled jurists . we have an out of control court , and i give you my word , if i'm elected president , every single supreme court justice will faithfully follow the law and will not act like philosopher kings 
trump humble . laughter and applause 
rubio . . . and , we're not going to do that to our country . . . 
bush well , i've been 
rubio . . . inaudible . . . 
christie . . . the only way we're going to be morale , the only way we're going to keep our promise to seniors is start by following the first rule we should all follow , which is to look at them , treat them like adults , and tell them the truth . it isn't there anymore , mike . they stole it . it got stolen from them . it's not theirs anymore . the government stole it , and spent it a long time ago . . . 
bush it doesn't work for anybody on this on stage . 
trump it's a minor civil case . 
trump . . . no , i'm not playing . 
fiorina 
trump so at the beginning , i said openly to everybody that i contribute to many , many politicians , both republican and democrat . and i have , over the years . i'm a businessman . i have , over the years . and i sort of have to laugh when ted makes a big deal out of the fact that he's doing well in the polls . well , i'm beating him in virtually every poll . i'm tied in texas , by the way , which i shouldn't be . but i think i'll do very well . but a poll just came out a bloomberg poll where i am beating him so badly that it's , like , embarrassing even for me to say i'm beating him that badly . and and here's the thing it was sort of funny 65 percent of the people don't like you i just got 36 percent of the vote , right ? i just got 46 percent on another one . i got 38 percent . . . bell ringing . . . on another one . that means and he got 20 and 22 , and he lost in south carolina so badly that was going to be his stronghold . he said a year ago , i can't lose south carolina . i beat him in a landslide . last week in nevada , i beat him in a landslide , and he sank about the polls . one other thing hillary clinton take a look at usa today , take a look at the q poll . i beat her , and i beat her badly . and i and i haven't even started at her . i only had one little interchange . . . . . . i only had one little interchange , and that was . . . bell ringing . . . four weeks ago , when she said i was sexist . and believe me , they had a rough weekend that weekend , between bill and hillary . they had a rough weekend . 
bush i consider it a public use . 
trump it does do wonderful things , but not as it relates to abortion . 
trump what we want to do , when we want to do it , and how hard do we want to hit ? because we are going to have to hit very , very hard to knock out isis . we're going to also have to learn who our allies are . we have allies , so called allies , we're spending billions and billions of dollars supporting people we have no idea who they are in syria . do we want to stay that route , or do we want to go and make something with russia ? i hate to say iran , but with russia , because we and the iran deal is one of the worst deals i have ever seen negotiated in my entire life . it's a disgrace that this country negotiated that deal . but very important . . . not only a disgrace , it's a disgrace and an embarrassment . but very important , who are we fighting with ? who are we fighting for ? what are we doing ? we have to rebuild our country . but we have to i'm the only one on this stage that said do not go into iraq . do not attack iraq . nobody else on this stage said that . and i said it loud and strong . and i was in the private sector . i wasn't a politician , fortunately . but i said it , and i said it loud and clear , you'll destabilize the middle east . that's exactly what happened . i also said , by the way , four years ago , three years ago , attack the oil , take the wealth away , attack the oil and keep the oil . they didn't listen . they just started that a few months ago . 
bush . . . half of that . 
cruz go in the fight against amnesty . . . 
rubio i know we all look alike . laughter 
carson well , the current constitution actually doesn't address that particular situation , but the fact of the matter is the supreme court , obviously , is a very important part of our governmental system . and when our constitution was put in place , the average age of death was under 50 , and therefore the whole concept of lifetime appointments for supreme court judges and federal judges was not considered to be a big deal . obviously , that has changed , and it's something that probably needs to be looked at pretty carefully at some point . but , we need to start thinking about the divisiveness that is going on in our country . i looked at some of the remarks that people made after finding out that justice scalia had died , and they were truly nasty remarks . and that we have managed to get to that position in our country is truly a shame . and we should be thinking about how we could create some healing in this land . but , right now , we're not going to get healing with president obama . that's very united nations clear . so , i . . . bell rings . . . fully agree that we should not allow a judge to be appointed during his time . 
trump let me tell you the real con artist . excuse me . excuse me . the real con artist is senator marco rubio who was elected in florida and who has the worst voting record in the united states senate . he doesn't go to vote . he's absent . he doesn't go . now , the people of florida can't stand him . he couldn't get elected dogcatcher . the people of florida the people of florida and by the way , i know he's going to spend 25 million on ads . without that he wouldn't have a chance . he's 20 points south . the people in florida wouldn't elect him dogcatcher . he couldn't get any he's right now 21 points down to me . and , you know . . . 
trump well , i don't really agree with president obama . i think i'm somewhere in the middle . what i want is i want a much better deal to be made because right now , cuba is making as usual with our country , we don't make good deal . we don't have our right people negotiating , we have people that don't have a clue . as an example , i heard recently where the threat was made that they want reparations for years of abuse by the united states , and nobody's talking about it and they'll end up signing a deal and then we'll get sued for 400 billion or 1 trillion . all that stuff has to be agreed to now . we don't want to get sued after the deal is made . so i don't agree with president obama , i do agree something should be should take place . after 50 years , it's enough time , folks . but we have to make a good deal and we have to get rid of all the litigation that's going to happen . this was just a little story but it was a big story to me because i said oh , here we go , we make a deal , then get sued for a tremendous amount of money for reparations . so i want to do something , but it's got to be done intelligently . we have to make good deal . 
rubio . . . let's talk about donald trump's strategy and my strategy and ted's strategy and john kasich's strategy when it comes to isis . and on health care and on the important issues facing this country . but let's be honest too about all this . the media has given these personal attacks that donald trump has made an incredible amount of coverage . let's start talking again about the issues that matter to this country . i'm ready to do that starting right here right now tonight . 
kasich i'm not biting . let me take you around the world , ok ? let me look , i'm going to take you very quickly . in russia , we need to tell them we're going to arm the ukrainians with defensive lethal weapons . and we're going to tell putin if you attack anybody in eastern europe in nato , you attack finland and sweden , which is not in nato , consider it an attack on us . and he will understand that . secondly , i would tell the chinese you don't own the south china sea . stop hacking us . and we're going to beef up our cyber command . and we're going to be in a position to be able to take out your systems if you continue to do this . now let's move over into the middle east . the egyptians , they know they're on their last legs there because of the attack from isis . the jordanians are really have been our friends . they know that they are at risk . so do the saudis . so do the gulf states . they are our allies , really , or have similar aims , we need to bring them closer to us . turkey a critical avenue to the middle east . we have to bring them towards the west , and not towards the east . 
trump . . . marco you don't know inaudible . . . 
rubio absolutely . that apple phone didn't even belong to the killer . it belonged to the killer's employer who have agreed to allow him to try to do this . that is all they're asking them to do is to disable the self destruct mode or the auto erase mode on one phone in the entire world . but apple doesn't want to do it because they think it hurts their brand . well , let me tell you , their brand is not superior to the national security of the united states of america . 
bush yes . 
cruz if you didn't tell them that , the tapes will prove you're innocent . 
kasich they were they were talking about what you would do with depositors . would you let these banks shut down ? my argument is , going forward , the banks have to reserve the capital , so that the so that the people who own the capital start pressuring the banks to not take these risky approaches , ted . but at the end of the day . . . 
cruz but you've never stood on this debate stage and says it works great in canada and scotland and we should do it here . 
paul you can't do nothing . and that's what i hear from some people , we'll do nothing and it will just be fixed . that's absurd , and i think people who don't want to fix it , really , or unwilling to take the chance to say , something has to change , are missing the boat here . the age will have to gradually rise , there is no question . it's the only way you fix medicare , the only way you fix social security . you will also have to means test the benefits and declare there's not enough money . it isn't i put money in , i'm getting it back . there is no money , it's a stack of paper . there is no money in the social security account . there is no money in the medicare account . there's only a promise to pay by the next generation , and the next generation's not big enough to pay it . crosstalk 
kasich when you are faced when you are faced , in the last financial crisis , with banks going under with banks going under , and people , people who put their their life savings in there , you got to deal with it . you can't turn a blind eye to it . now , going forward , that's one thing . if you had another financial crisis , perhaps there would be an effort to make sure that we do ph . 
carson well , there is no question that some people go overboard when it comes to trying to make profits , and they don't take into consideration the american people . what we have to start thinking about , as leaders , particularly in government , is what can we do for the average american ? and you think about the reasons that we're having such difficulty right now with our job market . well , the average small manufacturer , whatever they're manufacturing , drugs or anything , if they have less than 50 employees , the average cost in terms of regulations is 34 , 000 per employee . makes it a whole lot easier for them to want to go somewhere else . so what we're going to have to start doing instead of , you know , picking on this group or this group , is we're going to have to have a major reduction in the regulatory influence that is going on . the government is not supposed to be in every part of our lives , and that is what is causing the problem . 
rubio well , let me begin by saying that we have to understand who isis is . isis is a radical sunni group . they cannot just be defeated through air strikes . air strikes are a key component of defeating them , but they must be defeated on the ground by a ground force . and that ground force must be primarily made up of sunni arabs themselves , sunni arabs that reject them ideologically and confront them militarily . we will have to embed additional american special operators alongside them to help them with training , to help them conduct special missions , and to help improve the air strikes . the air strikes are important , but we need to have an air force capable of it . and because of the budget cuts we are facing in this country , we are going to be left with the oldest and the smallest air force we have ever had . we have to reverse those cuts , in addition to the cuts to our navy and in addition to the cuts to our army , as well . and beyond that , i would say we must win the information war against isis . every war we have ever been involved in has had a propaganda informational aspect to it . isis is winning the propaganda war . they are recruiting people , including americans , to join them , with the promise that they are joining this great apocalyptic movement that is going to defeat the west . we have to show what life is really like in isis territory , and we have to show them why isis is not invincible , by going out and conducting these attacks and publicizing them to those who they recruit . 
trump our country is in serious trouble . we don't win anymore . we don't beat china in trade . we don't beat japan , with their millions and millions of cars coming into this country , in trade . we can't beat mexico , at the border or in trade . we can't do anything right . our military has to be strengthened . our vets have to be taken care of . we have to end obamacare , and we have to make our country great again , and i will do that . thank you . 
bush yeah , well , i have got to respond to this . 
trump so , number one , they have to respect you . he has absolutely no respect for president obama . zero . syria's a mess . you look at what's going on with isis in there , now think of this we're fighting isis . isis wants to fight syria . why are we fighting isis in syria ? let them fight each other and pick up the remnants . i would talk to him . i would get along with him . i believe and i may be wrong , in which case i'd probably have to take a different path , but i would get along with a lot of the world leaders that this country is not getting along with . we don't get along with china . we don't get along with the heads of mexico . we don't get along with anybody , and yet , at the same time , they rip us left and right . they take advantage of us economically and every other way . we get along with nobody . i will get along i think with putin , and i will get along with others , and we will have a much more stable stable world . 
kasich there's a 
trump 
cruz . . . pointing out that he supported her four times in her presidential race . 
trump inaudible i'm and i'm meeting with people that are terrific people , but i have to say something because it's about judgment . i am the only person on this dais the only person that fought very , very hard against us ph , and i wasn't a sitting politician going into iraq , because i said going into iraq that was in 2003 , you can check it out , check out i'll give you 25 different stories . in fact , a delegation was sent to my office to see me because i was so vocal about it . i'm a very militaristic person , but you have to know when to use the military . i'm the only person up here that fought against going into iraq . crosstalk 
trump he is not the only one . 
paul well , you vote you oppose medical marijuana . . . 
rubio well , first let me address the tax issue because it's related to the entitlement issue and i want to thank you for holding a substantive debates where we can have debates about these key issues on taxes . here is the one thing i'm not going to do . i'm not going to have something that ted described in his tax plan . it's called the value added tax . and it's a tax you find in many companies in europe . where basically , businesses now will have to pay a tax , both on the money they make , but they also have to pay taxes on the money that they pay their employees . and that's why they have it in europe , because it is a way to blindfolded the people , that's what ronald reagan said . ronald regan opposed the value tax because he said it was a way to blindfold the people , so the true cost of government was not there there for them . now , you can support one now that's very low . but what is to prevent a future liberal president or a liberal congress from coming back and not just raising the income tax , but also raising that vat tax , and that vat tax is really bad for seniors . because seniors , if they are retired , are no longer earning an income from a job . and therefore , they don't get the income tax break , but their prices are going to be higher , because the vat tax is embedded in both the prices that business that are charging and in the wages they pay their employees . when i am president of the united states , i'm going to side with ronald regan on this and not nancy pelosi and we are not having a vat tax . 
trump i'm not only talking about drugs , i'm talking about other things . we will save 300 billion a year if we properly negotiate . we don't do that . we don't negotiate . we don't negotiate anything . 
bush look , i admire the fact that governor kasich is supporting spending more money on drug treatment and mental health . i think that's a high priority all across this country , but expanding obamacare is what we're talking about , and obamacare's expansion , even though the federal government is paying for the great majority of it , is creating further debt on the backs of our children and grandchildren . we should be fighting obamacare , repealing obamacare , replacing it with something totally different . when i was as a private citizen , florida was confronted with the choice . the governor was supportive of doing what john did . so was the florida senate . a committed speaker of the house asked me to go as a private citizen to make the case against the expansion . i did , and it wasn't expanded there , just as it wasn't expanded in south carolina under governor haley . crosstalk 
bush well , he's wrong on a lot of things , but on this he's wrong because i'm the most pro life governor on this stage . i got to act on my core beliefs . it's part of who i am . life is a gift from god . and from beginning end we need to respect it and err on the side of life . and so i defunded planned parenthood . we created a climate where parental notification took place . we were the only state to fund crisis pregnancy centers with state moneys . we were totally focused on this . and i would bring that kind of philosophy to washington , d . c . so here is a solution to this . title x of the hhs funding , there is something that was the reagan rule . it was passed in 1988 . and in that rule it was defined , and the courts approved this , that a planned parenthood , you couldn't separate the money between the actual abortion procedures , and there are 330 , 000 abortions that take place in this clinic , and their promotion of it . he interpreted it the right way , the courts ruled in his favor , and planned parenthood did not get funding during that time until president clinton came in . when i'm elected president , we will restore that interpretation of title x . and this deal will be finished . 
bush . . . so , you know . . . bell rings . . . this is the standard operating procedure , to disparage me . that's fine . . . 
paul you know , i think we need to set the record straight on this , because i think marco misspoke about the bill . on the gang of eight bill , there was no provisions really for extra scrutiny or safety for refugees . at the time the bill came up , two iraqi refugees came to my home town , bowling green , kentucky . their fingerprints were on a bomb from iraq . they were in the database , but we didn't pick them up . we relocated them here , put them in government housing , got them on food stamps . and we began providing for them , but we didn't have adequate security . on the gang of eight bill , on marco's bill , we had an opportunity . there was a conservative consensus for an amendment i put forward called trust , but verify that would have strengthened border security on both refugees , students and those coming here . and marco sided and i guess was more sympathetic to chuck schumer and to the president than he was to conservative principles . but this goes directly to national defense . and if he wants to run as a national national defense conservative , he's got to explain why he hasn't stepped up to support border security . 
trump i'm saying saving through negotiation throughout the economy , you will save 300 billion a year . 
huckabee . . . diabetes , heart disease , cancer and alzheimer's ? 
rubio well , first off , i too believe in curriculum reform . it is critically important in the 21st century . we do need curriculum reform . and it should happen at the state and local level . that's . . . that's . . . that is where educational policy belongs , because if a parent is unhappy with what their child is being taught in school , they can go to that local school board or their state legislature , or their governor and get it changed . here's the problem with common core . the department of education , like every federal agency , will never be satisfied . they will not stop with it being a suggestion . they will turn it into a mandate . in fact , what they will begin to say to local communities is , you will not get federal money unless do you things the way we want you to do it . and they will use common core or any other requirements that exists nationally to force it down the throats of our people in our states . 
christie we elected a republican congress to do this . and they should be doing it , and they're not . and they're giving the president a pass . 
rubio yes , well , it does . but it's in the following way , this is an important question . i think if you're running for president , these are important issues , because look at around the world today . there is a lunatic in north korea with dozens of nuclear weapons and long range rocket that can already hit the very place in which we stand tonight . the chinese are rapidly expanding their military . they hack into our computers . they're building artificial islands in the south china sea , the most important shipping lane in the world . a gangster in moscow is not just threatening europe , he's threatening to destroy and divide nato . you have radical jihadists in dozens of countries across multiple continents . and they even recruit americans using social media to try to attack us here at home . and now we have got this horrible deal with iran where a radical shia cleric with an apocalyptic vision of the future is also guaranteed to one day possess nuclear weapons and also a long range rocket that can hit the united states . these are extraordinarily dangerous times that we live in . and the next president of the united states better be someone that understands these issues and has good judgment about them because the number one issue that a president will ever confront , and the most important obligation that the federal government has , is to keep this nation safe . and today we are not doing that . we are eviscerating our military . and we have a president that is more respectful to the ayatollah in iran than he is to the prime minister of israel . 
rubio unfortunately , governor christie has endorsed many of the ideas that barack obama supports , whether it is common core or gun control or the appointment of sonia sotomayor or the donation he made to planned parenthood . our next president , and our republican nominee can not be someone who supports those positions . 
christie wolf , unfortunately , it's the new normal under barack obama and hillary clinton . the fact is that if you listen to hillary clinton the other day , what she said to the american people was , as regards to isis , my strategy would be just about the same as the president's . just about the same as the president's ? we have people across this country who are scared to death . because i could tell you this , as a former federal prosecutor , if a center for the developmentally disabled in san bernardino , california , is now a target for terrorists , that means everywhere in america is a target for these terrorists . now , i spent seven years of my life in the immediate aftermath of september 11th doing this work , working with the patriot act , working with our law enforcement , working with the surveillance community to make sure that we keep america safe . what we need to do , wolf , is restore those tools that have been taken away by the president and others , restore those tools to the nsa and to our entire surveillance and law enforcement community . we need a president who is going to understand what actionable intelligence looks like and act on it . and we need a president and a cabinet who understands that the first and most important priority of the president of the united states is to protect the safety and security of americans . as someone who has done it , i will make sure it gets done again . 
kasich and that's how i will be president , using that experience to drive this country forward . thank you . 
rubio that's not accurate . 
carson well , interestingly enough , you should see the eyes of some of those children when i say to them we're going to have to open your head up and take out this tumor . they're not happy about it , believe me . and they don't like me very much at that point . but later on , they love me . sometimes you i sound like him . you know , later on , you know , they really realize what's going on . and by the same token , you have to be able to look at the big picture and understand that it's actually merciful if you go ahead and finish the job , rather than death by 1 , 000 pricks . 
rubio . . . respond . i think i'm the first senator . laughter the no . 1 test for use of military force should be the vital national security interest of the united states . the reason why i opposed president obama bombing syria , is because he couldn't answer the question what do you do if chemical weapons end up in the hands of radical islamic terrorists like al nusra , like al qaida , like isis ? now , i also want to respond to several folks up here who said we should trust this iranian deal , see if the iranians will comply . anyone who is paying attention to what khamenei says knows that they will not comply . there is a reason khamenei refers to israel as the little satan , and america as the great satan . 
carson well , what we have to stop and think about is that we have weakened ourselves militarily to such an extent that if affects all of our military policies . our navy is at its smallest size since 1917 ; our air force , since 1940 . in recent testimony , the commandant of the marine corps said half of the non deployed units were not ready and you know , the sequester is cutting the heart out of our personnel . our generals are retiring because they don't want to be part of this , and at the same time , our enemies are increasing . our our friends can't trust us anymore . you know , ukraine was a nuclear armed state . they gave away their nuclear arms with the understanding that we would protect them . we won't even give them offensive weapons . you know , we turned our back on israel , our ally . you know , in a situation like that , of course obama's not going to be able to do anything . i would shore up our military first , because if you don't get the military right , nothing else is going to work . 
cruz well , thank you for that question . you know , there are three avenues of presidential authority to change the direction of this country . the first is executive power , the second is foreign policy , and the third is legislation . executive power , as we all know , has been the preferred vehicle of president obama , abusing his authority , abusing his constitutional authority . now , the silver lining of that is everything done with executive power can be undone with executive power , so i have pledged on day one i will rescind every single illegal and unconstitutional executive action barack obama has done . that means on day one his efforts to restrict the second amendment go away with the strike of a pen . that means on day one his illegal executive amnesty goes away with the strike of a pen . the reason i can end common core at the federal level is because obama is abusing executive power using race to the top funds in the department of education to force it on the states . that's one avenue . the second avenue of change is foreign policy , and foreign policy can change the fastest . it's worth remembering that iran released our hostages the day reagan . . . bell rings . . . was sworn in . and , the third is legislation , and that can only be done with the people behind you , which is why the two big legislative initiatives i'm campaigning on are repealing obamacare , and adopting a simple flat tax to abolish the irs . 
rubio oh , he doesn't make that money . 
trump . . . i think i'm talking . . . 
kasich that's what i did and i'll do it again in the first 100 days . 
rubio because we're not going to destroy our economy the way the left wing government that we are under now wants to do . we're not going to . . . 
paul no , i oppose it because you're taking money from the entitlement and then spending it immediately on other items . that's what they're doing . they're taking money from social security and they're going to spend it on the military and they're going to spend it on domestic spending . here's the thing . when you look at raising the debt limit , it should be leverage to try to reform government . in 2011 , the sequester was passed as a reform to slow down the rate of government . instead , the washington establishment raised both . we raised the military spending , took from entitlements , and raised domestic spending and the deficit will explode under this . this is the unholy alliance that people need to know about between right and left . right and left are spending us into oblivion . we should use the debt ceiling , as precisely to don , to force upon them budgetary reforms . 
carson well , i haven't said anything about me being the only one to do anything , so let me try that . i'm the only one to separate siamese twins . . . laughter the the only one to operate on babies while they were still in mother's womb , the only one to take out half of a brain , although you would think , if you go to washington , that someone had beat me to it . laughter but i but i'm very hopeful that i'm not the only one who's willing to pick up the baton of freedom , because freedom is not free , and we must fight for it every day . every one of us must fight for it , because we're fighting for our children and the next generation . 
bush it's weak to denigrate the disabled . and , it's really weak to call john mccain a loser because he was a . . . 
trump i never went bankrupt , never . now but you don't want to say that . now , let me just say , i've used it , just like the biggest leaders in the country . let me tell you something florida . florida , he put so much debt on florida . you know , we keep saying he's a wonderful governor , wonderful governor . he put so much debt on florida , and he increased spending so much that as soon as he got out of office , florida crashed . i happened to be there . it's my second home . florida crashed . he didn't do a good job as governor . 
trump well , let me say a couple of things . first of all , marco said earlier on that president obama knows exactly what he's doing , like we have this president that really knows . i disagree , respectfully , with marco . i think we have a president who , as a president , is totally incompetent , and he doesn't know what he's doing . i think he has no idea what he's doing . and our country is going to hell . so , i just want to say , we disagree on that . is that okay ? 
kasich no , i . . . crosstalk 
bush if but . . . 
trump let me explain something . because of the fact that the pharmaceutical companies because of the fact that the pharmaceutical companies are not mandated to bid properly , they have hundreds of billions of dollars in waste . we don't bid properly . we don't have proper bidding procedures . the reason we don't is because they take care of all of the senators , all of the congressman , and they don't bid . they don't go out to bid . 
trump and and and i'm a leader . i'm a leader . i've always been a leader . i've never had any problem leading people . if i say do it , they're going to do it . that's what leadership is all about . 
trump look , from a humanitarian standpoint , i'd love to help , but we have our own problems . we have so many problems that we have to solve . end video clip 
paul may i respond ? 
bush he was a great guy . 
cruz imposing their liberal policies on millions of americans 
trump and we will . 
bush . . . we don't have a draft . i'm not suggesting we have a draft . what i'm suggesting is that we ought to have readiness being the first priority of our military , and secondly , that we make sure that the morale is high . and right now , neither one of those are acceptable because we've been gutting the military budget . we also need to reform our procurement process . we need to make sure there are more men and women in uniform than people than civilians in our defense department . there's a lot of things that we need to reform to bring our defense capabilities into the 21st century and i'm the guy that could do that . that's why i have the support of generals , of admirals , of 12 medal of honor recipients and many other people that know that i would be a steady commander in chief and rebuild our military . 
rubio well , let me first talk about justice scalia . his loss is tremendous , and obviously our hearts and prayers go out to his family . he will go down as one of the great justices in the history of this republic . you talk about someone who defended consistently the original meaning of the constitution , who understood that the constitution was not there to be interpreted based on the fads of the moment , but it was there to be interpreted according to its original meaning . justice scalia understood that better than anyone in the history of this republic . his dissent , for example , on the independent counsel case is a brilliant piece of jurist work . and , of course , his dissent on obergefell as well . no . 2 , i do not believe the president should appoint someone . and it's not unprecedented . in fact , it has been over 80 years since a lame duck president has appointed a supreme court justice . and it remind us of this , how important this election is . someone on this stage will get to choose the balance of the supreme court , and it will begin by filling this vacancy that's there now . and we need to put people on the bench that understand that the constitution is not a living and breathing document . it is to be interpreted as originally meant . 
rubio i know that rand is a committed isolationist . i'm not . i believe the world is a stronger and a better place , when the united states is the strongest military power in the world . 
walker well , i think the most important thing we can do when it comes to policing it's something you've had a guest on who's a friend of mine milwaukee county sheriff david clark , who's talked to me about this many times in the past it's about training . it's about making sure that law enforcement professionals , not only in the way in to their positions but all the way through their time , have the proper training , particularly when it comes to the use of force . and that we protect and stand up and support those men and women who are doing their jobs in law enforcement . and for the very few that don't , that there are consequences to show that we treat everyone the same here in america . 
trump true . 
christie no , it's not . but with donald , it's a good start . that's really good . laughter no , listen . this is an issue that that we've gotta talk about , and we haven't talked about yet . 71 percent of all federal spending is on entitlements and debt service . when john kennedy was elected president in 1960 , it was 26 percent . harvard and dartmouth says that social security's going to go insolvent in seven to eight years . so what i say is very simple . we need to save this program for the good people out there who have paid into the system and need it . and if that means making sure that folks like donald and many of us on the stage don't get it , that's the right thing to do because here's what hillary clinton is going to want to do . she's going to want to put more money into a system that has already lied to us and stolen from us . this government doesn't need more money to make social security solvent . we need to be not paying out benefits to people who don't really need it . we need to protect the people who social security means the difference between picking between heat and rent and food . that's why i put out the proposal and that's the people i'm trying to . . . crosstalk 
christie if you think it's bad now , you should've seen it when i got there . laught and applause the fact is the fact is , in the eight years before i became governor , taxes and fees were raised at the state level 115 times . in the eight years before i became governor , spending was increased 56 percent . and in the eight years before i become governor , taxes and fees were raised at the state level 115 times . in the eight years before i became governor , spending was increased 56 percent , and in the eight years before i became governor , there was zero net private sector job growth in new jersey . zero . for eight years . so , what did we do ? we came in , we balanced an 11 billion deficit on a 29 billion budget by cutting over 800 programs in the state budget . we brought the budget into balance with no tax increases . in fact , we vetoed five income tax increases during my time as governor . we cut business taxes 2 . 3 billion , and we cut regulation by one third of what my predecessor put in place . and , what's happened since ? a hundred ninety two thousand private sector jobs in the five and a half years i've been governor . we have a lot of work to do in new jersey , but i am darn proud we've brought our state back . 
trump every single question comes to me ? 
trump give me a break . 
walker that's because of barack obama . we've had a president who called isis the j . v . squad , yemen a success story , iran a place we can do business with . it's not because of george w . bush ; it's because of barack obama . . . inaudible on that point , though , whether it's whether we're talking about national security , foreign policy or we're talking about domestic policy , the key . . . 
kasich . . . these resources into strengthening the military . so , we can do it all . . . 
rubio let me inaudible . i was invoked in that question , so let me just say in that answer let me say , the real question here , i hate to interrupt this episode of court tv . laughter but the real but i think we have to get back to what this election has to be about . ok ? listen , we this is the greatest country in the history of mankind . but in 2008 , we elected a president that didn't want to fix america . he wants to change america . we elected a president that doesn't believe in the constitution . he undermines it . we elected a president that is weakening america on the global stage . we elected a president that doesn't believe in the free enterprise system . this election has to be about reversing all of that damage . that's why i'm running for office because when i become president of the united states , on my first day in office we are going to repeal every single one of his unconstitutional executive orders . when i'm president of the united states we are getting rid of obamacare and we are rebuilding our military . and when i'm president , we're not just going to have a president that gives a state of the union and says america is the greatest country in the world . when i'm president , we're going to have a president that acts like it . 
huckabee i think we need to remember that there are maybe some controversies about autism , but there is no controversy about the things that are really driving the medical costs in this country . and i would really believe that the next president ought to declare a war on cancer , heart disease , diabetes , and alzheimer's , because those are the four things that are causing the greatest level of cost . john kennedy said , we'll go to the moon in a decade and bring a man back , and we did it . i grew up in the '50s . i remember the polio vaccine . we saved billions of dollars since that time , because we haven't had to treat for polio . why doesn't this country focus on cures rather than treatment ? why don't we put a definitive focus scientifically on finding the cure for cancer , for heart disease , for diabetes and for alzheimer's , a disease alone that will cost us 
trump you haven't employed in your life one person . 
paul i'd like to just mention something about my tax plan , and how it relates to the discussion . . . 
cruz i have never supported legalization , and i do not intend to support legalization . let me tell you how you do this , what you do is you enforce the law . . . crosstalk 
paul how is it conservative ? 
carson well , first of all , i didn't say that the rate would be 10 percent . i used the tithing analogy . 
trump i will say one thing , what marco said is i understand it . he is talking about a little give and take and a little negotiation . and you know what ? that's ok . that's not the worst thing in the world . there is nothing wrong with that . i happen to be much stronger on illegal immigration . sheriff joe arpaio endorsed me . and if he endorses you , believe me , you are the strongest , from arizona . but give and take is ok . and i thought what he said is ok . we may differ on the degree . but what he said to me is ok . 
bush so he supports pelosi , he supports schumer , he supports clinton 
trump totally false . 
trump ok . well let no , i haven't . i really haven't . laughter 
kasich wolf , again , it would depend exactly what , you know , what was happening . what the situation was . but , if there was an opportunity to remove the leader of north korea and create stability ? because , i'll tell you , you keep kicking the can down the road we're going to face this sooner or later . but , in the meantime , i'm also aware of the fact that there's 10 million people living in seoul . so , you don't just run around making charges . i have put it on the table that i would leave to see regime change in north korea . now , perhaps the chinese can actually accomplish that with this man who is now currently the leader , but the fact is we have to bring everything to bear . we have to be firm , and we've got to unite those people in that part of the world to stand firmly against north korea , and make sure we have the ballistic . . . bell ringing . . . ballistic missile technology to defend ourselves . 
cruz . . . that is bad . if there's nothing , release them tomorrow . crosstalk 
bush we're not we shouldn't have another financial crisis . what we ought to do is raise the capital requirements so banks aren't too big to fail . dodd frank has actually done the opposite , totally the opposite , where banks now have higher concentration of risk in assets and the capital requirements aren't high enough . if we were serious about it , we would raise the capital requirements and lessen the load on the community banks and other financial institutions . this vast overreach has created a huge problem for our country , and hillary clinton wants to double down on that . i was in washington , iowa , about three months ago talking about how bad washington , d . c . , is . it was get the kind of the anyway . we had . . . laughter it and i talked to a banker there . this is a bank that had 125 million of assets , four branches . their compliance costs because of dodd frank went from 100 , 000 to 600 , 000 in a two year period . the net effect of that is and they had they had not one loan that went bad during the financial crisis . they knew they knew their borrowers . they gave back to the community . they were engaged in the community . and imagine america without its community banks . well , that's what's happening because of dodd frank . that's that's my worry . my worry is that the real economy has been hurt by the vast overreach of the obama administration . and hillary clinton , she wants to double down on that . she wants to create even more so . she is a captive of the left of her party to the point now where she is she was for the trade agreement in the pacific agreement . now she's against it . she was hinted she was for the xl pipeline . now she's opposed to it . all the things that would create sustained economic growth she's now doubling down against it . 
cruz . . . the reason is you're welcome to have the check back . 
cruz what an incredible nation we have , that the son of a bartender and the son of mailman and the son of a dishwasher and a successful businessman , can all stand on this stage , competing and asking for your support . in just a few months , one of us is going to stand on the debate stage with hillary clinton . and the choice we are making today is who will best defend our values ? who will best defend your values and fight for you ? i have to tell you , i cannot wait to stand on that stage with hillary clinton and say , madam secretary , you are asking for a third term of a failed administration . you are asking for millions more to remain in stagnant jobs ; for millions more steelworkers to be out of work ; for wages to remain low ; for young people not to have a future . we can do better . we can instead repeal obamacare , abolish the irs , unleash millions of jobs , defend the bill of rights , defend the second amendment and religious liberty , stand with our cops and our firefighters and our soldiers , and we can keep america safe . that's the choice i will put to her this fall . 
trump i mean a lot of them . i mean a lot of them . 
fiorina i too remember september 11th . i remember immediately putting into place security procedures all throughout our company that did business in 170 countries where we thought corporate interests would be attacked next . to take our country back , to keep our nation safe , we have to begin by beating hillary clinton . we need to unify our party . we need to better than our government , which 75 percent of the american people now think is corrupt and incompetent . they're right . we need to better than our politics . 80 percent think we have a professional political class of both parties that cares more about its power , position and privilege than actually on getting anything done . we need to unify our party , we need a real conservative in the white house , and we need to beat hillary clinton to take our country back and keep our nation safe . i can . i am . and together , if you join me , we will take our country back . 
cruz what it means is using overwhelming air power to utterly and completely destroy isis . to put things in perspective , in the first persian gulf war , we launched roughly 1 , 100 air attacks a day . we carpet bombed them for 36 days , saturation bombing , after which our troops went in and in a day and a half mopped up what was left of the iraqi army . right now , obama is launching between 15 and 30 air attacks a day . it is photo op foreign policy . we need to use overwhelming air power . we need to be arming the kurds . we need to be fighting and killing isis where they are . and let me go back to the earlier discussion a minute ago . it's not a lack of competence that is preventing the obama administration from stopping these attacks . it is political correctness . we didn't monitor the facebook posting of the female san bernardino terrorist because the obama dhs thought it would be inappropriate . she made a public call to jihad , and they didn't target it . the tsarnaev brothers , the elder brother made a public call to jihad and the obama administration didn't target it . nidal hasan communicated with anwar al awlaki , a known radical cleric , asked about waging jihad against his fellow soldiers . the problem is because of political correctness , the obama administration , like a lot of folks here , want to search everyone's cell phones and e mails and not focus on the bad guys . and political correctness is killing people . 
bush america's at a crossroads . the d . c . politicians continue to make things worse . i have a proven record of success , 32 years in business , and 8 years as governor of the state of florida . i will change the culture in washington , just as i changed the culture in tallahassee . i will do so in a way that will bring people together . we need a unifier , not a cynical divider in chief , and that's exactly what i will do . imagine a country where people are lifted out of poverty again . imagine a country where the middle class can get rising income again . i know we can do this because we're still the most extraordinary country on the face of the earth . 
rubio well , i think one of the presidents well , the president i grew up under was ronald reagan . and reagan had a vision for america's future . and if you think about what ronald reagan inherited , it's not unlike what the next president is going to inherit . this is the worst president we've had in 35 years , 35 years back would have made it jimmy carter . that's what ronald reagan inherited . and i think the question you would ask is , how did you inspire again the american people to believe in the future ? how did you what did it take to ensure that the american people , despite all of the difficulties of the time you know , you look back at that time , the american military was in decline . our standing in the world was in decline . we had hostages being held in iran . our economy was in bad shape . the american people were scared about the future . they were scared about what kind of country their children were going to live in and inherit . and yet somehow ronald reagan was able to instill in our nation and in our people a sense of optimism . and he turned america around because of that vision and ultimately because of that leadership . i wish ronald reagan was still around . this country needs someone just like that . and if our next president is even half the president ronald reagan was , america is going to be greater than it has ever been . 
kasich well , first of all , wolf , i said last february that we needed to have people on the ground , troops on the ground in a coalition similar to what we had in the first gulf war . i remember when the egyptian ambassador to the united states stood in the rose garden and pledged arab commitment to removing saddam hussein from kuwait . before we came out here tonight , i am told that the saudis have organized 34 countries who want to join in the battle against terrorism . first and foremost , we need to go and destroy isis . and we need to do this with our arab friends and our friends in europe . and when i see they have a climate conference over in paris , they should have been talking about destroying isis because they are involved in virtually every country , you know , across this world . now , you destroy isis in a coalition . you get joint intelligence with our european friends . and then here at home , there are things called the joint terrorism task force , headed by the fbi , and made up of local law enforcement , including state police . they need the tools . and the tools involve encryption where we cannot hear what they're even planning . and when we see red flags , a father , a mother , a neighbor who says we have got a problem here , then we have to give law enforcement the ability to listen so they can disrupt these terrorist attacks before they occur . we can do this , but we've got to get moving . pay me now or pay me a lot more later . this is the direction we need to go . 
trump but i've hired people . nobody up here has hired anybody . 
rubio . . . are you talking about the military , rand ? 
trump i was a businessman , i got along with clinton , i got along with everybody . that was my job , to get along with people . 
bush no it isn't but it is an important subject to talk about for sure . and i think people have good ideas on this . clearly , we need to secure the border . coming here legally needs to be a lot easier than coming here illegally . if you don't have that , you don't have the rule of law . we now have a national security consideration , public health issues , we have an epidemic of heroine overdoses in all places in this country because of the ease of bringing heroine in . we have to secure the border . it is a serious undertaking and yes , we do need more fencing and we do need to use technology , and we do need more border control . and we need to have better cooperation by the way with local law enforcement . there are 800 , 000 cops on the beat , they ought to be trained to be the eyes and ears for law enforcement for the threat against terror as well as for immigration . this is a serious challenge and if we can get it right , yes , we'll start winning votes again . the real problem isn't anybody on this stage , the real problem is barack obama has had six years to advocate a position to fix this and he's done nothing . the congress has funded these programs of building more fencing and doing all this and he hasn't done it . he wants to maintain it as a wedge issue and so does hillary clinton . republicans need to fix it and when we do , we'll be better off . 
carson it's all about america . you know , the people who say the guy who paid a billion dollars because he had 10 , he has still got 9 billion left , that's not fair , we need to take more of his money . that's called socialism . that doesn't work so well . what made america into a great nation was the fact that we said , that guy just put in 1 billion , let's create an environment that's even more conducive to his success so that next year he can put in 2 billion . and that's the kind of thing that helps us to grow . we can't grow by continuing to take a piece of pie , and dividing it , and redistributing it . but , i'm also looking at what doctor at what governor huckabee talked about . . . 
cruz all right , well , donald lives by the polls every day . he tweets about the polls . 
rubio well , you just you just listed a litany of discredited attacks from democrats and my political opponents , and i'm not gonna waste 60 seconds detailing them all . but i'm going to tell you the truth . here's the truth . i didn't inherit any money . my dad was a bartender , my mother was a maid . they worked hard to provide us the chance at a better life . they didn't save enough money for us to go to school . i had to work my way through school . i had to borrow money to go to school . i tried ph , early in my marriage , explaining to my wife why someone named sallie mae was taking 1 , 000 out of our bank account every month . laughter i know what it's like to owe that money , and we've worked hard . we've worked hard our whole life to provide a better family a better life for our family . we own a home four blocks away from the place that i grew up in . my four children have been able to receive a good christian education , and i've been able to save for them to go to college so they never have to have the loans that i did . but i'm not worried about my finances , i'm worried about the finances of everyday americans who today are struggling in an economy that is not producing good paying jobs while everything else costs more . and that's what this economy needs to that's what this debate needs to be about . this debate needs to be about the men and women across this country that are struggling on a daily basis to provide for their families the better future that we've always said this country is all about . 
fiorina you know , listening to this conversation , let me just say , we have a lot of argument about laws but none of it solves the problem . let's examine what happened , why did we miss the tsarnaev brothers , why did we miss the san bernardino couple ? it wasn't because we had stopped collected metadata it was because , i think , as someone who comes from the technology world , we were using the wrong algorithms . this is a place where the private sector could be helpful because the government is woefully behind the technology curve . but secondly , the bureaucratic processes that have been in place since 9 11 are woefully inadequate as well . what do we now know ? that dhs vets people by going into databases of known or suspected terrorists . and yet , we also know that isis is recruiting who are not in those databases . so of course , we're going to miss them . and then we now learn that dhs says , no , we can't check their social media . for heaven's sakes , every parent in america is checking social media and every employer is as well , but our government can't do it . the bureaucratic procedures are so far behind . our government has become incompetent , unresponsive , corrupt . and that incompetence , ineptitude , lack of accountability is now dangerous . it is why we need a different kind of leadership in the white house that understands how to get bureaucracies competent again . 
huckabee i've been patiently waiting , and i'm going to just say this about iran . 
cruz . . . actually , with respect , i have gotten the intelligence briefings on the mid east . those have been going on for many years . i haven't gotten the intelligence briefing tonight on what north korea's doing because i'm here in new hampshire . when you're responding to an immediate incident , you need to know the intelligence of what's occurring . but what i was saying look , it is qualitatively different dealing with a country once they have nuclear weapons . it's why you prevent them from getting nuclear weapons in the first place because your hands are somewhat tied once they have nukes . it's why this iranian nuclear deal is so catastrophic , and it's why i've pledged , on the very first day in office , to rip to shreds this iranian nuclear deal so we're not sitting here in five years , wondering what to do about an iranian missile launch when they have nuclear weapons . the stakes are too high for that . 
cruz i promise you , donald , there's nothing about you . . . 
kasich listen , you know , i if i were sitting at home and watch thing back and forth , i would be inclined to turn it off . i mean , people at home want to know across this country , they want to know what we're going to do to fix this place , how we'll balance a budget , how we're going to create more economic growth , how we'll pay down the debt . what we're going to do to strengthen the military . so , we just spent 10 minutes here . . . 
cruz . . . with hillary clinton saying . . . 
trump i didn't 
trump let me just . can i just finish my . . . 
trump . . . you let me talk . let me talk . quiet . a lot of times . . . booing . . . that's all of his donors and special interests out there . booing so it's what it is . that's what and by the way , let me just tell you , we needed tickets . you can't get them . you know who has the tickets for the i'm talking about , to the television audience ? donors , special interests , the people that are putting up the money . booing that's who it is . the rnc told us . we have all donors in the audience . and the reason they're not loving me . . . booing . . . the reason they're not excuse me . the reason they're not loving me is , i don't want their money . i'm going to do the right thing for the american public . i don't want their money . i don't need their money . and i'm the only one up here that can say that . eminent domain , the keystone pipeline do you consider that a private job ? do you do you consider that . . . 
trump . . . i've won most of the lawsuits . 
fiorina we've mismanaged going out of iraq . 
paul what are the rules on who gets to follow up . how do we decide on who gets to follow up ? i've seen plenty of other people follow up ? 
bush there's look , there's 
trump we have tremendous has been just sucked out of our country by china . china says they don't have that good of control over north korea . they have tremendous control . i deal with the chinese all of the time . i do tremendous the largest bank in the world is in one of my buildings in manhattan . i deal with them . they tell me . they have total , absolute control , practically , of north korea . they are sucking trillions of dollars out of our country they're rebuilding china with the money they take out of our country . i would get on with china , let china solve that problem . bell rings they can do it quickly and surgically . that's what we should do with north korea . 
bush here's the facts when donald trump talks about judgment , what was his position on who would've been the best negotiator to deal with iran ? it wasn't a republican ; it was hillary clinton . that's what you believe . i mean , the lack of judgment and the lack of understanding about how the world works is really dangerous in this kind of time that we're saying . so is that the judgment that you bring to the table , that hillary clinton . . . 
fiorina this is why the nation is fed up . . . 
kasich well , there's no question . they were saying that the israelis intended to go to the dome of the rock . and i mean , when you think about this , thank goodness we work with israelis to give them the iron dome where they can protect themselves against all the missiles that were flying in . could you imagine living in like miami here and having people shooting missiles in ? secondly , there was just an article the other day , hugh , that i know you're familiar with the israelis are learning to train underground in combat because the palestinians now , hamas in particular , is digging these tunnels trying to get under israel . they're coming at them from above , they're trying to come at them under the ground . and i just have to tell you this , i don't believe there is any long term permanent peace solution . and i think pursuing that is the wrong thing to do . i believe that every day that we can stability in that region by supporting the israelis and making sure they have the weapons and the security that they need with our 100 percent backing is the way to proceed in the middle east in regard to israel . 
paul may i respond ? 
trump i do not want socialized medicine , just so you understand . he goes around saying oh , he wants it . i do not want socialized medicine . i do agree with him that it's going to be a disaster , obamacare , for the economy . in 2017 , it will be impossible for us to pay for it if you look at what's going on . that's why it has to be repealed , for a lot of reasons , number one , it doesn't work , number two , premium . you look at premiums going up , 25 , 35 , even 45 percent , and more . we have to get rid of obamacare . it is going to destroy our economy completely . our economy is not doing well . it is going to destroy our economy greatly . and on that , i agree . 
paul i'd like first to respond to the acquisition , we should i think it's particularly naive , particularly foolish to think that we're not going to talk to russia . the idea of a no fly zone , realize that this is also something that hillary clinton agrees with several on our side with , you're asking for a no fly zone in an area in which russia already flies . russia flies in that zone at the invitation of iraq . i'm not saying it's a good thing , but you better know at least what we're getting into . so , when you think it's going to be a good idea to have a no fly zone over iraq , realize that means you are saying we are going to shoot down russian planes . if you're ready for that , be ready to send your sons and daughters to another war in iraq . i don't want to see that happen . i think the first war in iraq was a mistake . . . cheering and applause you can be strong without being involved in every civil war around the war . . . 
rubio trust ph me , i get that . ok . 
trump thank you . i am going to bring jobs back to the united states like nobody else can . we're going to fix our very depleted military . we're going to take care of our vets . we're going to strengthen our borders . and you're going to be very , very proud of this country in just a few years if i'm elected president . thank you . 
christie when you you know , senator . . . crosstalk 
bush well , first of all , hugh , if you're looking at republican advisers , you have to go to the last two administrations . that happened to be 41 and 43 . so just by definition , if you're and many of the people here that are seeking advice from the foreign policy experts in the republican side , they they served in my dad's administration , my brother's administration . of course that's the case . but i'm my own man . i'm going to create a strategy that is based on the simple fact that the united states needs to lead the world . the first thing that we need to do is to stop the craziness of the sequester . rebuild our military so that our so that we don't deploy people over and over again without the necessary equipment to keep them safe , to send a signal to the world that we're serious . if we're going to lead the world , then we need to have the strongest military possible . we need to rebuild our counterintelligence and intelligence capabilities . we need to focus on the fact that the next president is going to start in 2017 , not in 1990 you know , 30 years ago , or when my brother started . the world is dramatically different . and i believe that we need to restore america's presence and leadership in the world . name a country where our relationship is better today than it was the the day that barack obama got elected president . under hillary clinton , and barack obama , we have seen a weakness that now creates huge problems for the next president of the united states . so i'll have a team that will be that will be following the doctrine i set up , and it will be peace through strength . we're sitting here in this library , which is a wonderful place to talk about this , because that's exactly what happened in the 1980s , and the world was a lot safer because of . . . 
bush well , first of all he said the exact same thing about me , that i would make a great vice presidential nominee when mitt romney was considering . i said the same thing about marco . i think we were both right at the time , and mitt picked somebody else . so , let's move on to the 2016 race . who has the leadership skills . . . . . . who has the leadership skills to lead ? and , i'm proud of the fact that i have 12 medal of honor recipients , over 30 admirals and generals that believe that i would be a steady hand as commander in chief . that i serve as governor of the state of florida where we cut taxes and reduced government . i took on very powerful interests , forged consensus , fought for my beliefs , implemented them and the state was better off . we had eight hurricanes and four tropical storms in 16 months . the whole state was turned upside down . it required a steady hand . leadership . you learn this , you learn it by doing it . it's not something that you just go up , and on the job do it . it's not the same . look , let's be clear . marco rubio is a gifted , gifted politician , and he may have the skills to be a president of the united states , but we've tried it the old way with barack obama , with soaring eloquence and we got we didn't get a leader we got someone who wants to divide the country up . the next president . . . bell rings . . . going to have to forge consensus to bring about a set of common purposes so that we can move forward again in this country . . . 
paul . . . but i'd say that he's already hedging his bets because he's used to buying politicians . 
trump you're the one . now , let me just tell you . let me just tell you . crosstalk excuse me . excuse me . i've given my answer , lyin' ted . i've given my answer . 
trump jeb doesn't really believe i'm unhinged . he said that very simply because he has failed in this campaign . it's been a total disaster . nobody cares . and frankly , i'm the most solid person up here . i built a tremendous company and all i want to do is make america great again . i don't want our country to be taken away from us , and that's what's happening . the policies that we've suffered under other presidents have been a disaster for our country . we want to make america great again . and jeb , in all fairness , he doesn't believe that . 
rubio . . . numerically , it's gonna be higher . but the greatest gains , percentage wise , for people , are gonna be at the lower end of our plan , and here's why because in addition to a general personal exemption , we are increasing the per child tax credit for working families . we are lowering taxes on small business . you know , a lot of business activity in america is conducted like the guy that does my dry cleaning . he's an s corporation . he pays on his personal rate , and he is paying higher than the big dry cleaning chain down the street , because he's paying at his personal rate . under my plan , no business , big or small , will pay more than 25 percent flat rate on their business income . that is a dramatic tax decrease for hard working people who run their own businesses . crosstalk 
kasich can we comment on that ? 
cruz . . . rand is exactly right . his plan is a good plan , and i will note that my 10 plan also eliminates the payroll tax , eliminates the death tax , 
rubio how much ? 
bush so , 40 years ago , i smoked marijuana , and i admit it . i'm sure that other people might have done it and may not want to say it in front of 25 million people . my mom's not happy that i just did . laughter and applause that's true . and here's the deal . here's the deal . we have we have a serious epidemic of drugs that goes way beyond marijuana . what goes on in colorado , as far as i'm concerned , that should be a state decision . but if you look at the problem of drugs in this in this society today , it's a serious problem . rand , you know this because you're campaigning in new hampshire like all of us , and you see the epidemic of heroin , the overdoses of heroin that's taking place . people's families are are being torn apart . it is appropriate for the government to play a consistent role to be able to provide more treatment , more prevention we're the state that has the most drug courts across every circuit in in in florida , there are drug courts to give people a second chance . that's the best way to do this . 
cruz growth is the answer . and as reagan demonstrated , if we cut taxes , we can bring back growth . 
rubio thank you . well , i've learned the rules on this . laughter look , in addition to what donald was saying is we also need to talk about the legal immigration system for permanent residents . today , we have a legal immigration system for permanent residency that is largely based on whether or not you have a relative living here . and that's the way my parents came legally in 1956 . but in 2015 , we have a very different economy . our legal immigration system from now on has to be merit based . it has to be based on what skills you have , what you can contribute economically , and most important of all , on whether or not you're coming here to become an american , not just live in america , but be an american . 
rubio here we go . 
rubio maria i was mentioned in that . i was mentioned in that statement . 
fiorina you know , i want to go back for a moment to what we were just talking about . crony capitalism is alive and well , and has been so in washington , d . c . for decades . what's crony capitalism ? crony capitalism is what happens when government gets so big and so powerful that only the big and the powerful can handle it . so why are the pharmaceutical companies consolidating ? why are there five even bigger wall street banks now , instead of the ten we used to have on wall street ? because when government gets big and powerful , the big feel like they need to get even bigger to deal with all that power , and meanwhile , the small and the powerless in this case , 1 , 590 community banks go out of business . you see , folks , this is how socialism starts . government causes a problem , and then government steps in to solve the problem . this is why , fundamentally , we have to take our government back . the student loan problem has been created by government . government trying to level the playing field between internet and brick and mortar creates a problem . the fcc jumping in now and saying , we're going to put 400 pages of regulation over the internet , is going to create massive problems . but guess who pushed for that regulation ? the big internet companies . this is what's going on . big and powerful use big and powerful government to their advantage . it's why you see walgreens buying rite aid . it's why you see the pharmaceuticals getting together . it's you see the health insurance companies getting together . it's why you see the banks consolidating . and meanwhile , small businesses are getting crushed . community based businesses and farms are getting crushed . community banks are going out of business . big government favors the big , the powerful , the wealthy and the well connected , and crushes the small and the powerless . 
walker chris , i actually said that on your show earlier this year . crosstalk i acknowledged that . i said i actually listened to the american people . and i think people across america want a leader who's actually going to listen to them . i talked to border state governors and other elected officials . i look at how this president , particularly through last november , messed up the immigration system in this country . most importantly , i listened to the people of america . i believe we need to secure the border . i've been to the border with governor abbott in texas and others , seeing the problems that they have there . there is international criminal organizations penetrating our southern based borders , and we need to do something about it . secure the border , enforce the law , no amnesty , and go forward with the legal immigration system that gives priority to american working families and wages . 
trump yes , i will . yes . i will . 
trump ok . wouldn't matter . i never said it . end video clip 
rubio well , i know this has been an unusual election cycle , as it continues , and there's a lot of problems in america , and people are truly hurting . but this election is not just about confronting our problems ; it's also about embracing our opportunities . i believe the 21st century holds the potential to be the greatest era in the history of the united states , if we get this election right and if we act now . if we do , if we do what needs to be done , we can leave our children as the freest and most prosperous americans that have ever lived , and the 21st century can be the greatest era in the amazing story of america . so i ask everyone to vote for me and join our effort at marcorubio . com . 
paul wolf . . . 
rubio he has defrauding people out of things , and not just and not just , by the way , on the issue of trump university . he had another development in mexico that he had nothing to do with except his name on the building . people put money into that building . 
trump we are not talking about isolation . we're talking about security . we're not talking about religion . we're talking about security . our country is out of control . people are pouring across the southern border . i will build a wall . it will be a great wall . people will not come in unless they come in legally . drugs will not pour through that wall . as far as other people like in the migration , where they're going , tens of thousands of people having cell phones with isis flags on them ? i don't think so , wolf . they're not coming to this country . and if i'm president and if obama has brought some to this country , they are leaving . they're going . they're gone . 
christie what are you supposed to . . . 
rubio i think it's already happening . look at the turnout in iowa . a historic number of people came out and voted in those caucuses . there are saying the same thing is going to happen here in new hampshire . look at the rallies that every single person on this stage is having . much higher numbers than you used to see in the past and here is why . because people are starting to understand , very clearly , that this election is going to be a turning point . that 2016 is not just a choice between republican or democrat . it is a referendum on our identity as a nation and as a people . so here is what hillary clinton needs to understand . we're going to have our primary , we're going to have our debates which by the way , are twice as many as the democrats have been willing to have themselves . but we're going to bring this party together and we are going to defeat hillary clinton , because she is unqualified to be the president of the united states of america . she put classified information on her computer because she thinks she's above the law and anyone who lies to the families of people who have lost their loved ones in the service of our country like she did in benghazi , can never be the commander in chief of the united states of america . 
trump well , i'll tell you what . in the middle east , we have people chopping the heads off christians , we have people chopping the heads off many other people . we have things that we have never seen before as a group , we have never seen before , what's happening right now . the medieval times i mean , we studied medieval times not since medieval times have people seen what's going on . i would bring back waterboarding and i'd bring back a hell of a lot worse than waterboarding . 
trump how did he keep us safe when the world trade center the world excuse me . i lost hundreds of friends . the world trade center came down during the reign of george bush . he kept us safe ? that is not safe . that is not safe , marco . that is not safe . 
trump i just think it's very excuse me . 
rubio he thinks a palestinian is a real estate deal . 
cruz donald , true or false , you've said the government should pay for everyone's health care . 
carson can i can i can i just . . . 
trump . . . i think he's going to do it whether or i'm o . k . with it or not . i think it's up to mitch mcconnell and everybody else to stop it . it's called delay , delay , delay . 
carson . . . and , as far as medicare and medicaid , my main goal is to get rid of obamacare and put the care back in the hands of inaudible . . . 
rubio correct . 
trump i think she's got a beautiful face , and i think she's a beautiful woman . 
rubio yes , a couple of points . number one , on the libya situation , we didn't topple gadhafi , the libyan people toppled gadhafi . the only choice before america that this president had to make is , does it happen quickly or does it take a long time ? and i argued if it takes a long time , you're going to have rebel forces emerge like these radical islamists to take advantage of the vacuum . and that's what happened . that's where the term lead from behind came . and that's the foreign policy that apparently senator cruz appears to agree with . on john kerry , yes , you know why , because every day john kerry wasn't appointed was another day hillary clinton was still in charge of the state department . and she was absolutely horrible . i couldn't imagine that they were going to find somebody even worse than her , but this president never ceases to amaze . laughter amd applause and the last point i would make on south korea , now this is important , because we're asking to be commander in chief . donald is asking to be commander in chief . and he's saying these guys need to do more . south korea contributes 800 million a year to that effort . and japan contributes as well . and here's why our commitment to that regional security is so critical , donald , because if we walk away from them , both japan and south korea will become nuclear weapons powers . they can do that very quickly . and that's what they will do if the american defense agreements wither away , which is why we have to rebuild the military , but why we can't walk away from our asia pacific defense status . 
trump i am by far the leader . but if you listen to a politician , he'll try and convince you otherwise . 
trump inaudible 
trump . . . excuse me . excuse me . 
trump no , it's unfair . crosstalk 
cruz he was appointed in . . . 
trump well , i . . . 
kasich well , i mean , well , i was in congress for 18 years on the defense committee . and then , you know , after 9 11 , the secretary of defense called me in to help out with some things . and i've been a supporter of israel a strong supporter of israel longer than anybody on this stage . i didn't give as much money as donald gave , but i've been standing with the israelis for a very long time . and frankly , i think the problem we have in foreign policy right now , wolf , is that we are not certain with who we stand with . our allies are not sure what to make of us , and our enemies are moving . and one are moving because they're not sure what we will do . it's a very interesting development here within the 24 hours . we said to the south koreans that we would give them the high altitude defense system . it really rattled the chinese , and for the first time since we took positive action , the chinese are beginning to take action against north korea . when we stand firm and we let the world know who we're with , who we stand for , and we bring our allies together , that is the road forward . crosstalk 
huckabee that's an easy one . i'd put my wife on there . laughter i've been married to her 41 years . she's fought cancer and lived through it . she's raised three kids , five great grandkids , and she's put up with me . i mean , who else could possibly be on that money other than my wife . and that way , she could spend her own money with her face . laughter 
bush i got that . and the problem today is there's no confidence in washington , d . c . there needs to be more than one meeting , there needs to complete dialogue with the large technology companies . they understand that there's a national security risk . we ought to give them a little bit of a liability release so that they share data amongst themselves and share data with the federal government , they're not fearful of a lawsuit . we need to make sure that we keep the country safe . this is the first priority . the cybersecurity challenges that we face , this administration failed us completely , completely . not just the hacking of opm , but that is that is just shameful . 23 million files in the hands of the chinese ? so it's not just the government the private sector companies , it's also our own government that needs to raise the level of our game . we should put the nsa in charge of the civilian side of this as well . that expertise needs to spread all across the government and there needs to be much more cooperation with our private sector . 
rubio and so you make them in china and in russia . 
trump thank you thank you for the book . go ahead . 
rubio many from other countries instead of hiring americans . 
carson well , you know , there's a false narrative that only the political class has the wisdom and the ability to be commander in chief . but if you go back and you study the design of our country , it was really designed for the citizen statesman . and we need to be talking about where does your experience come from ? you know , and i've had a lot of experience building things , organizing things , you know , a national scholarship program . one of the things that you'll notice if you look through my life is that i don't do a lot of talking . i do a lot of doing . and really , it says more about a person than how much they talk . and then some people say you're weak because , you know , you're not loud and you're not boisterous and you're not rude . but the fact of the matter is , look and see what i've done . and that speaks volumes about strength . 
christie and the last piece is this . i like marco too , and two years ago , he called me a conservative reformer that new jersey needed . that was before he was running against me . now that he is , he's changed his tune . i'm never going to change my tune . i like marco rubio . he's a good guy , a smart guy , and he would be a heck of a lot better president than hillary rodham clinton would ever be . 
trump education through washington , d . c . i don't want that . i want local education . i want the parents , and i want all of the teachers , and i want everybody to get together around a school and to make education great . and it was very interesting , i was with dr . ben carson today , who is endorsing me , by the way , tomorrow morning , and he is . . . we were talking . we spoke for over an hour on education . and he has such a great handle on it . he wants competitive schools . he wants a lot of different things that are terrific , including charter schools , by the way , that the unions are fighting like crazy . but charter schools work and they work very well . so there are a lot of things . but i'm going to have ben very involved with education , something that's an expertise of his . 
trump excuse me . he ran one terrible campaign . that's an election that should have been won . 
trump you pushed him . you pushed him . 
trump let me just tell you . jeb goes around saying , just like the biggest business leaders in this country , i've used the laws of the land to chapter i bought a company , i threw it immediately into a chapter , i made a great deal . i uses the laws to my benefit , because i run a company . 
trump ok , no , no , no a deal is a deal . let me tell you that . i learned a long time ago . 
cruz i really hope that we don't we don't see yoga on this stage . 
carson well , obviously , you don't understand my views on homosexuality . i believe that our constitution protects everybody , regardless of their sexual orientation or any other aspect . i also believe that marriage is between one man and one woman . and there is no reason that you can't be perfectly fair to the gay community . they shouldn't automatically assume that because you believe that marriage is between one man and one woman that you are a homophobe . and this is one of the myths that the left perpetrates on our society , and this is how they frighten people and get people to shut up . you know , that's what the pc culture is all about , and it's destroying this nation . the fact of the matter is we the american people are not each other's enemies , it's those people who are trying to divide us who are the enemies . and we need to make that very clear to everybody . 
trump . . . if we went out to the proper bid . of course you are . 
cruz well , let's be clear when it comes to experience . what president obama wants to do is he's run to the united nations , and he wants to use the united nations to bind the united states , and take away our sovereignty . well , i spent five and a half years as a solicitor general of texas , the lead lawyer for the state , in front of the u . s . supreme court , and i went in front of the supreme court , and took on the world court of the united nations in a case called medellin v . texas , and we won a historic victory saying the world court , and the u . n . , has no power to bind the united states , and no president of the united states , republican or democrat , has the authority to give away our sovereignty . and , so , if there's anyone up here who would be bound by this catastrophic deal with iran , they're giving up the core responsibility of commander in chief , and as president , i would never do that . 
carson well , you know , it's not a simple issue , and now , you know , we've gotten evidence that there can been active viruses in other bodily fluids like saliva and urine . so , this is going to be , obviously , a big deal . do we quarantine people ? if we have evidence that they are infected , and that there is evidence that that infection can spread by something that they're doing , yes . but , just willy nilly going out and quarantining a bunch of people because they've been to brazil , i don't believe that that's going to work . what we really need to be thinking about is how do we get this disease under control ? and this is where we need rapid response . we need a rapid response for ebola , we need rapid response for zika , there will be other things that will come up . these are the kinds of things that the nih , the cdc , can be very effective in . we need to give the the appropriate support for those kind of things . 
bush but the idea that you can't that you're just gonna grow your way out of this i have a plan to grow the economy at 4 percent , but you're gonna have to make adjustments for both medicare and social security . 
bush donald , you're not going to be able to insult your way to the presidency . that's not going to happen . and i do have the strength . leadership , leadership is not about attacking people and disparaging people . leadership is about creating a serious strategy to deal with the threat of our time . and i laid out that strategy before the attacks in paris and before the attacks in san bernardino . and it is the way forward . we need to increase our military spending . we need to deal with a no fly zone in syria , a safe zone . we need to focus on building a military that is second to none . . . 
fiorina ladies and gentleman , this is why the american people are standing up . 
trump i have a very hardline position , we have a country or we don't have a country . people that have come into our country illegally , they have to go . they have to come back into through a legal process . i want a strong border . i do want a wall . walls do work , you just have to speak to the folks in israel . walls work if they're properly constructed . i know how to build , believe me , i know how to build . i feel a very , very strong bind , and really i'm bound to this country , we either have a border or we don't . people can come into the country , we welcome people to come but they have to come in legally . 
rubio well , let me say , from protecting the people of florida from imminent domain abuse , to bringing accountability to the v . a . , to the girls count act , to sanctioning groups , i'm proud of my service in the united states senate and before that , in the florida legislature . i will say , if politics becomes and the presidency becomes about electing people who have been congress or in the senate the longest , we should all rally around joe biden . he's been around 1 , 000 years . he's passed hundreds of bills and i don't think any of us believe joe biden should be president of the united states . and let's dispel once and for all with this fiction that barack obama doesn't know what he's doing . he knows exactly what he's doing . barack obama is undertaking a systematic effort to change this country , to make america more like the rest of the world . that's why he passed obamacare and the stimulus and dodd frank and the deal with iran . it is a systematic effort to change america . when i'm president of the united states , we are going to re embrace all the things that made america the greatest nation in the world and we are going to leave our children with what they deserve the single greatest nation in the history of the world . 
carson well , first of all , i was wrong about taking the oil subsidy . i have studied that issue in great detail . and what i have concluded is that the best policy is to get rid of all government subsidies , and get the government out of our lives , and let people rise and fall based on how good they are . and you know , all of this too big to fail stuff and picking and choosing winners and losers this is a bunch of crap , and it is really causing a great deal of great deal of problems for our society right now . and and you know , it goes back to the whole concept of regulations , which are in everything . the reason that i i hate them so much is because every single regulation costs in terms of goods and services . that cost gets passed on to the people . now , who are the people who are hurt by that ? it's poor people and middle class . doesn't hurt rich people if their bar of soap goes up ten cents , but it hurts the poor and the middle class . and bernie sanders will tell them that it's because of the rich . well , i'll tell you something you can take everything from the top 1 percent , and you apply it to our fiscal gap , and you won't even make a dent in it . 
trump well , i think it was . and he actually said that . did you say that ? crosstalk 
cruz . . . as the strongest supporter of the second amendment on this stage today , and i will . . . 
fiorina you know , mr . trump fancies himself a very good negotiator . and , i accept that he's done a lot of good deals , so , mr . trump 'ought to know that we should not speak to people from a position of weakness . senator paul should know that as well . one of the reasons i've said that i would not be talking to vladimir putin right now , although i have met him as well , not in a green room for a show , but in a private meeting . laughter , applause , and cheering one of the reasons i've said i wouldn't be talking to vladimir putin right now is because we are speaking to him from a position of weakness brought on by this administration , so , i wouldn't talk to him for awhile , but , i would do this . i would start rebuilding the sixth fleet right under his nose , rebuilding the military the missile defense program in poland right under his nose . i would conduct very aggressive military exercises in the baltic states so that he understood we would protect our nato allies . . . bell ringing . . . and i might also put in a few more thousand troops into germany , not to start a war , but to make sure that putin understand that the united states of america will stand with our allies . that is why governor bush is correct . we must have a no fly zone in syria because russia cannot tell the united states of america where and when to fly our planes . we also have a set of allies . . . . . . we also have a set of allies in the arab middle east that know that isis is their fight . they have asked us specifically over , and over again to support them . king abdullah of jordan , a man i've known for a very long time , has asked us for bombs and material , we have not provided it . the egyptians are asking us to share intelligence , we are not , i will . the kurds have asked us to arm them for three years , we are not , i would . the egyptians , the saudis , the kuwaitis , the bahrain's , the emirati , the kurds . . . bell ringing . . . all of these , i know , by the way , understand isis is their fight , but they must see leadership support and resolve from the united states of america . . . 
bush i think it's my turn , isn't it ? 
cruz . . . if donald actually cared about . . . 
paul hey , gerard , you know , we might want to point out china is not part of this deal . 
kasich . . . you know , the reason is because , as the democrats tell me all the time , i can get the crossover votes . you see , because throughout this campaign i've talked about issues , i have never tried to go and get into these scrums that we're seeing here on the stage . and , people say everywhere i go , you seem to be the adult on the stage . in terms of you know , mitt romney's a great guy , but he doesn't determine my strategy . the fact of the matter is i'm running for president because i worked hard to fix this country when i was in washington as the chairman of the budget committee where we had some of the most significant job growth after we balanced the budget . we had wages going up , it was very successful in ohio . our wages grow faster than the national average . we're up over 400 , 000 jobs . we paid down , back in the old days , they paid down half a trillion dollars of the national debt . it's a formula that works . and , i believe that formula will work when i return to washington as the president . and , by the way , i won't need on the job training because i know how to do all of this , and within the first 100 days i will have a plan that will pass the congress because . . . bell ringing . . . it is reasonable , and i can bring both sides together . . . 
carson about medicare ? 
trump well , if ted was listening , he would have heard me say something very similar . i said we would not do the deal unless it was going to be a very good deal for us . and i think i said it loud and i think i said it very clear . and i think after 50 years , and i have many friends , i own many properties in miami , many , many , and i have many people that know and they feel exactly the way i do , make a deal , it would be great , but it's got to be a great deal for the united states , not a bad deal for the united states . as far as iran is concerned , i would have never made that deal . that is one of the worst deals ever , ever made by this country . it is a disaster . so for ted to say i agree with this deal , i mean , it's a staple in my speeches that that may he worst single deal i've ever seen negotiated . so don't try to put it on me like it's wonderful , like i love it . 
trump thank you . 
cruz well look , absolutely . and one of the things we're so frustrated about is the corruption , what i've called the washington cartel . it's career politicians in both parties that get in bed with the lobbyists and special interests . and listen , donald told you for 40 years he's been sitting at that table using his money to buy influence , supporting liberal democrats like hillary clinton and john kerry , but also supporting the republican establishment and funding their effort to crush the tea party . and now his argument is after four decades of being part of that influence buying , after hillary clinton spending decades being part of that influence selling , that suddenly he will change . but the interesting point is tonight he hasn't pointed to a single special interest he's willing to take on . he didn't take on wall street when he supported the tarp bailout in wall street . he won't take on ethanol . and my campaign , by contrast , was funded by 1 . 1 million contributions all over this country . 
carson 
carson let me just say , if you're talking about an 18 trillion economy , you're talking about a 15 percent tax on your gross domestic product . you're talking about 2 . 7 trillion . we have a budget closer to 3 . 5 trillion . but if you also apply that same 15 percent to several other things , including corporate taxes , and including the capital gains taxes , you make that amount up pretty quickly . so that is not by any stretch a pie in the sky . 
trump well , i think i am , and to me , i view the word conservative as a derivative i of of the word conserve . we want to converse our money . we want to conserve our wealth . we want to conserve . we want to be smart . we want to be smart where we go , where we spend , how we spend . we want to conserve our country . we want to save our country . and we have people that have no idea how to do that and they are not doing it , and it's a very important word and it's something i believe in very , very strongly . 
kasich . . . we shouldn't be fighting with each other . she's the real opponent , she's the real problem . 
fiorina having met vladimir putin , if i may . . . 
kasich well , if that's the case , we're going to win every state , if bernie sanders is the nominee . that's not even an issue . but look . . . . . . and i know bernie , and i can promise you he's not going to be president of the united states . so here's this the situation , i think , maria . and this is what we have to 
cruz you can see it out of donald's own mouth . 
huckabee chris , i disagree with the idea that the real issue is a constitutional amendment . that's a long and difficult process . i've actually taken the position that's bolder than that . a lot of people are talking about defunding planned parenthood , as if that's a huge game changer . i think it's time to do something even more bold . i think the next president ought to invoke the fifth , and fourteenth amendments to the constitution now that we clearly know that that baby inside the mother's womb is a person at the moment of conception . the reason we know that it is is because of the dna schedule that we now have clear scientific evidence on . and , this notion that we just continue to ignore the personhood of the individual is a violation of that unborn child's fifth and 14th amendment rights for due process and equal protection under the law . it's time that we recognize the supreme court is not the supreme being , and we change the policy to be pro life and protect children instead of rip up their body parts and sell them like they're parts to a buick . 
cruz well , it's more than not shedding a tear . it's actively getting involved to topple a government . and we keep hearing from president obama and hillary clinton and washington republicans that they're searching for these mythical moderate rebels . it's like a purple unicorn . they never exist . these moderate rebels end up being jihadists . and i'll tell you whose view on assad is the same as mine . it's prime minister netanyahu . prime minister netanyahu has said israel doesn't have a dog in that fight because assad is a puppet of iran , a shia radical islamic terrorist , but at the same time , prime minister netanyahu doesn't want to see syria governed by isis . and we need to focus on american interests , not on global aspirations . . . crosstalk 
rubio well , no . it's not the case . it didn't pass , and we haven't solved immigration in this country . it's still a problem . it is worse today than it was three years ago , which is worse than it was five years ago . and it has to be confronted and solved . but the only way forward on this issue you asked a question about flexibility . let me tell you about that . one of the things that you need in leadership is the ability to understand that to get things done , you must figure out the way to get it done . you will not pass comprehensive immigration reform . people do not trust the federal government . they want to see the law being enforced . they want to see illegal immigration come under control . they want to see that wall . they want to see e verify . they want to see all of these things working , and then they will have a conversation with you about what do you do with people that have been here a long time that are otherwise , you know , not criminals . but they're not going to do it until you first enforce the law . 
kasich well look , i believe in immigration , but it has to be controlled . the simple fact of the matter is i wouldn't be standing here . i'd be maybe running for president of croatia if we didn't have immigration . immigration is something that brings youth and vibrance and energy to our country . but we clearly have to control our borders . we can't have people just walking in . look , we lock our doors at night in our homes . the country has to be able to lock its doors as well . so , we i have a comprehensive plan to deal with this problem of immigration . i would say we have to absolutely finish the wall and guard the border . and if anybody were to come in after that , they are going to have to go back . no excuses because we can't continue this problem . i think we ought to have a guest worker program , where people come in , work and go home . and i think at the same time , for the 11 and a half million who are here , then in my view if they have not committed a crime since they've been here , they get a path to legalization . not to citizenship . i believe that program can pass the congress in the first 100 days . but let's not lose sight of the fact that the whole key to the future of america is strong economic growth with common sense regulation , lower taxes and a balanced budget . we can have a rising tide that lifts all the workers in america , all the people who are citizens of america , if we'll just follow the formula that works , that i used in washington . and guess what , i've used it in ohio to grow over 400 private sector jobs since i've been governor 
rubio all of these companies he has ruined . 
trump you'll be here a long time . 
christie no . let's make something very clear . i learned seven years as a federal prosecutor in dealing with types of situations like we're talking about in north korea , where criminals take people hostage . you never pay ransom to the criminals . ever . you never pay ransom to the criminals . everyone out at home watching tonight understands that principle . and so , what you need to do is to engage in a much different way with these folks . they do not understand anything but toughness and strength , and we need to engage the chinese to deal with the north koreans , but we also need to make sure that they understand there's a commander in chief who will not pay ransom for any hostage . this president and his former secretary of state are for paying ransom for hostages . when do that , you endanger even more americans around the world to be the subject of this type of hostage taking and illegal detention . you need a strong commander in chief who will look these folks in the eye and say , we will not put up with this and we will take whatever actions we need to take , not only to get our people home safely , but to swiftly and surely punish those who believe they can violate the law and violate american's sovereign rights to travel the world freely and safely . this is unacceptable . and this is why this president is so weak and why the secretary of state , who is embracing a third barack obama term , would be even weaker . 
rubio he is now dividing europe up . . . 
fiorina no . you know why three ? because only if it's about three pages are you leveling the playing field between the big , the powerful , the wealthy and the well connected who can hire the armies of lawyers and accountants and , yes , lobbyists to help them navigate their way through 73 , 000 pages . three pages is about the maximum that a single business owner or a farmer or just a couple can understand without hiring somebody . almost 60 percent of american people now need to hire an expert to understand their taxes . so yes , you're going to hear a lot of talk about tax reform 
kasich well , megyn , my father was a mailman . his father was a coal miner . my mother's mother could barely speak english . and their son today stands on this podium in the great state of ohio not only as the governor , but a candidate for president of the united states . cheering and applause i do believe in miracles . you know , i've had a lot of elections . but my elections are really not about campaigns . i tell my people that these are about a movement . and a movement to do what ? to restore common sense . a movement to do things like provide economic growth . and a movement not to let anybody be behind . you know , today the country is divided . you asked a question about the police and the difficulty in communities . we've got to unite our country again , because we're stronger when we are united and we are weaker when we are divided . and we've got to listen to other people's voices , respect them , but keep in mind , and i believe in terms of the things that i've read in my lifetime , the lord'is not picking us . but because of how we respect human rights , because that we are a good force in the world , he wants america to be strong . he wants america to succeed . and he wants america to lead . and nothing is more important to me than my family , my faith , and my friends . cheering and applause 
cruz donald . donald . donald . i understand rules are very hard for you . they're very confusing . 
trump yes , i'm sure it was . 
bush i would like to see more millionaires . i think we need to grow more millionaires , we need create a prosperity society where people can rise up . this notion that somehow we're undertaxed as a nation is just fool hearty , when we have entitlements growing far faster than our ability to pay for it . a conservative , because that's the point of this , believes in limited government , believes in a entrepreneurial capitalism and a strong national defense . but it also has to be , we need to reform things . in my town hall meetings , i went to a place where a woman described her neighbor , who has a better economic deal by not working than her struggling to make ends meet . we need to be on the side of working people . and you know , the problem with the left is , another tax , another regulation , another mandate makes it harder for them to rise up . everything that we should do should be focused on high , sustained economic growth , where the middle class gets a raise for the first time , and where people are rewarded for work , rather than non work . and i know how to do this . and if people are interested in the specifics of this , they ought to go to jeb2016 . com . 
rubio thank you , and thank you for watching tonight . this is a difficult time in our country . our economy's flat , it's not creating the jobs it once did , and people struggle living paycheck to paycheck . our culture's in trouble . wrong is considered right and right is considered wrong . all the things that once held our families together are now under constant assault . and around the world , america's reputation is in decline . our allies don't trust us , our adversaries don't fear us , iran captures our sailors and parades them before the world on video . these are difficult times , but 2016 can be a turning point . that's why i'm running for president , and that's why i'm here today to ask you for your vote . if you elect me president , we are going to re embrace free enterprise so that everyone can go as far as their talent and their work will take them . we are going to be a country that says that life begins at conception and life is worthy of the protection of our laws . we're going to be a country that says that marriage is between one man and one woman . we are going to be a country that says , the constitution and the rights that it talks about do not come from our president , they come from our creator . we are going to be loyal to our allies like israel , not enemies like iran . and we will rebuild the u . s . military so no one will there test it . vote for me . i will unify this party . i will grow it . we will win this election , and we will make the 21st century a new american century . 
trump i would want to make a good deal , i would want to make a strong , solid , good deal because right now , everything is in cuba's favor . right now , everything , every single aspect of this deal is in cuba's favor . it the same way as the iran deal . we never walked we never all we do is keep giving . we give and give and give . 
kasich before i get to that , this is the ninth or 10th debate . what i've been watching here , this back and forth , and these attacks , some of them are personal . i think we're fixing to lose the election to hillary clinton if we don't stop this . i mean , the fact is you know what ? i would suggest , why don't we take off all the negative ads and all the negative comments down from television and let us just talk about what we're for , and let's sell that , and the republican party will be stronger as a result . . . 
rubio thank you . you know , this week i had the great pleasure of having my kids join me on the campaign trail . i hadn't' seen them in a while , and it was great to have them alongside me , but the most important part of it is that it once again reminded me of what's at stake . here in new hampshire in less than 72 hours , we are literally deciding what kind of country we will be like when they are my age . what kind of country they will be able to raise their families in . and , that's why i'm asking you for your vote . you vote for me , and we will unite this party , we will grow the conservative movement , we will defeat hillary clinton , and we will leave our children what our parents left us . the single greatest nation in the history of all mankind . thank you . 
trump . . . by taking the course . 
rubio now he's repeating himself . 
rubio well , it's interesting . over the last few weeks , i've listened to jeb as he walked around the country and said that you're modeling your campaign after john mccain , that you're going to launch a furious comeback the way he did , by fighting hard in new hampshire and places like that , carrying your own bag at the airport . you know how many votes john mccain missed when he was carrying out that furious comeback that you're now modeling after ? 
trump sounds good . sounds good to me , governor . i will tell you that our system is broken . i gave to many people , before this , before two months ago , i was a businessman . i give to everybody . when they call , i give . and do you know what ? when i need something from them two years later , three years later , i call them , they are there for me . 
trump you have to go in first of all , when you take away their money , when you take away their wealth , that'll very much weaken and it will happen fairly fast . they'll last for about a year , based on all of the wealth they've accumulated . but when you stop the banking channels and when you stop the oil and take the oil not just bomb it , take it when you do that , it's going to dry up very quickly . they're going to become a very weakened power , quickly . thank you . 
trump i know what's happening with the economy . you don't know a thing . 
cruz and any justice that harry reid and chuck schumer sign off on . . . 
cruz donald donald , relax . 
rubio well , he's very flexible , so you never know . 
rubio well , bret , what i've argued from the very beginning is isis in order to defeat isis , you must deny them operating spaces . this is how isis or any radical group , for that matter , can grow . it's how al qaida was able to carry out 9 11 , is that the taliban gave them an operating space in afghanistan . today that operating space has largely been based in iraq and syria , but i've been warning about the libyan presence for the better part of two years . so they need to be targeted wherever they have an operating space . they do need to be defeated on the ground by a ground force made up primarily of sunni arabs themselves . this is a radical sunni movement . they can only be defeated if they are driven out and the territory is held by sunni arabs . but it will require a specific number of american special operators , in combination with an increase in air strikes . and that will include , if necessary , operating spaces in libya , which , in fact , they are using to project into the sinai against egypt and ultimately into europe , as well . 
christie denver . 
rubio yeah . i have a i got mentioned , can i respond ? 
cruz . . . realclearpolitics he has lost to hillary on eight of them . in the last 10 polls on realclearpolitics , i either tied or beat hillary . and this is an example . you know , the mainstream media is laying off donald now . they're going to pick apart his taxes . they're going to pick apart his business deals . and let's take , for example , one of hillary's great vulnerabilities , the corruption at the clinton foundation , the fact that she had ceos and foreign companies giving her money while she was secretary of state . the next republican nominee needs to be able to make that case against hillary . and if donald tried to did it , hillary would turn to donald and say , but gosh , donald , you gave 100 , 000 to the clinton foundation . i even went to your wedding . he can't prosecute the case against hillary , and we can't risk another four years of these failed obama policies by nominating someone who loses to hillary clinton in november . crosstalk 
trump is it public or private ? 
christie what we should do is to be investing in all types of energy , john , all types of energy . i've laid out . . . 
carson well , you know , the statement that i made last week , that i would leave the party was contingent upon whether in fact the party acts like they have in the past with a lot of subterfuge and dishonesty , or like they're going act now because i spike to reince priebus , and he assured me that the washington post writer had it all wrong , and that they're not be engaging in anything to thwart the will of the people . that's why i got into this race , as a member of we the people , to try bring some honesty and integrity back to the process . 
fiorina you know , jeffrey sonnenfeld is a well known clintonite and honestly had it out for me from the moment that i arrived at hewlett packard . but honestly , mr . trump , i find it quite rich that you would talk about this . you know , there are a lot of us americans who believe that we are going to have trouble someday paying back the interest on our debt because politicians have run up mountains of debt using other people's money . that is in fact precisely the way you ran your casinos . you ran up mountains of debt , as well as losses , using other people's money , and you were forced to file for bankruptcy not once 
fiorina let me just say on taxes , how long have we been talking about tax reform in washington , d . c . ? we have been talking about it for decades . we now have a 73 , 000 page tax code . there have been more than 4 , 000 changes to the tax plan since 2001 alone . there are loads of great ideas , great conservative ideas from wonderful think tanks about how to reform the tax code . the problem is we never get it done . we have talked about tax reform in every single election for decades . it never happens . and the politicians always say it is so complicated , nobody but a politician can figure it out . the truth is this , the big problem , we need a leader in washington who understands how to get something done , not to talk about it , not to propose it , to get it done . 
trump you're tough . 
carson well , thank you . you know , i was hoping to get a chance to talk about north korea . i was the only one who didn't get to do that , and i've got stuff to say about it , let me tell you . but at any rate , you have to replace it with something that makes sense . it doesn't make sense . and the reason that i dislike obamacare is because the government comes in and tells the people which the nation is supposed to be centered on that we don't care what you think , this is what we're doing . and if you don't like it , too bad . that's a problem . and we can't afford to do that because that will fundamentally change america . i have proposed a health empowerment account system . everybody gets a health empowerment account the day they are born , they keep it until they die . they can pass it on . we pay for it with the same dollars that we pay for traditional health care with , recognizing that we spend twice as much as many countries per capita and health care and don't have as such access . we give people the ability to shift money within their health empowerment account so that each family basically becomes its own insurance company without a middleman ; that saves you a awful lot of money . and that will lower the cost of your catastrophic insurance tremendously , because the only thing coming out of that is catastrophic health care . and then in terms of taking care of the indigent , we have another whole system , and i can go ahead and explain it , but i don't have the time , but i'd be happy to if you give me some more time . but go to my website bencarson . com , read about it . you can read about everything that's been discussed here in great detail . 
trump i think they had a responsibility , yes . 
bush no , no . what i said was i don't believe that i would be president of the united states and have the same dysfunction that exists in washington , d . c . now . 
bush not on specific issues , not at all . i think the next president if i'm president , i will appoint people i'll nominate people that have a proven record in the judiciary . the problem in the past has been we have appointed people thinking you can get it through the senate because they didn't have a record . and the problem is that sometimes we're surprised . the simple fact is the next president needs to appoint someone with a proven conservative record , similar to justice scalia , that is a lover of liberty , that believes in limited government , that consistently applied that kind of philosophy , that didn't try to legislator from the bench , that was respectful of the constitution . and then fight and fight , and fight for that nomination to make sure that that nomination passes . of course , the president , by the way , has every right to nominate supreme court justices . i'm an article ii guy in the constitution . we're running for the president of the united states . we want a strong executive for sure . but in return for that , there should be a consensus orientation on that nomination , and there's no doubt in my mind that barack obama will not have a consensus pick when he submits that person to the senate . 
kasich let me just let me respond . first of all , ohio does have an energy industry , but we're diversified . we're one of the fastest growing states in the country . we came back from the dead . and you know what ? it works very , very well . and secondly , when you talk about me being on the board of lehman brothers , i wasn't on the board of lehman brothers . i was a banker and i was proud of it . and i traveled the country and learned how people made jobs . we ought to have politicians who not only have government experience but know how the ceos and the job creators work . my state is doing great across the board . and guess what , in 2011 , i got a deal . . . 
rubio let me set the record straight on a couple of things . the first is , the evidence is now clear that the majority of people coming across the border are not from mexico . they're coming from guatemala , el salvador , honduras . those countries are the source of the people that are now coming in its majority . i also believe we need a fence . the problem is if el chapo builds a tunnel under the fence , we have to be able to deal with that too . and that's why you need an e verify system and you need an entry exit tracking system and all sorts of other things to prevent illegal immigration . but i agree with what governor kasich just said . people are frustrated . this is the most generous country in the world when it comes to immigration . there are a million people a year who legally immigrate to the united states , and people feel like we're being taken advantage of . we feel like despite our generosity , we're being taken advantage of . and let me tell you who never gets talked about in these debates . the people that call my office , who have been waiting for 15 years to come to the united states . and they've paid their fees , and they hired a lawyer , and they can't get in . and they're wondering , maybe they should come illegally . and so these are important issues , and we should address it . it's a serious problem that needs to be addressed , and otherwise we're going to keep talking about this for the next 30 years , like we have for the last 30 years . 
trump you worked with him and you pushed him . why do you lie ? 
trump i believe i did . 
carson there are a lot of problems that are going on , and we need to solve those problems , we need to build up our military . . . 
cruz and there is a real danger , dana , when people get distracted . i'm answering the question , wolf . there's a real danger when people get distracted by peripheral issues . they get distracted by democracy building . they get distracted about military conflicts . we need to focus on defeating jihadism . isis and iran have declared war on america , and we need a commander in chief who will do everything necessary to keep our children safe . 
fiorina well , i thought we had been hearing quite a bit about govenor christie's record as governor , actually . i think track records are very important . i completely agree that what's at stake here is the future of this nation , and the future of every american . but i do think that a track record of leadership is vital because in the end this election is about leadership . and let's talk about what leadership is . it's not about braggadocio , it is about challenging the status quo , solving problems , producing results . and the highest calling of leadership is to unlock potential in others . 
trump thank you very much . the republican party has a great chance to embrace millions of people that it's never known before . they're coming by the millions . we should seize that opportunity . these are great people . these are fantastic people . these are people that love our country . these are people that want to see america be great again . these are people that will win us the election and win it easily . these are people that once the election is won will be able to put supreme court justices up that will do a fabulous job . because let me tell you , if we lose this election , you're going to have three , four or maybe even five justices and this country will never , ever recover . it will take centuries to recover . so i just say embrace these millions of people that now for the first time ever love the republican party . and unify . be smart and unify . 
trump i would certainly be open to closing areas where we are at war with somebody . i sure as hell don't want to let people that want to kill us and kill our nation use our internet . yes , sir , i am . 
rubio no . i think there are three major threats that you want to immediately get on top of . no . 1 is , what are we doing in the asia pacific region , where both north korea and china pose threats to the national security of the united states . no . 2 is , what are we doing in the middle east with the combination of the sunni shia conflict driven by the shia arc that iran is now trying to establish in the middle east , also the growing threat of isis . and the third is rebuilding and reinvigorating nato in the european theater , particularly in central europe and in eastern europe , where vladimir putin is now threatening the territory of multiple countries , already controls 20 percent of georgia and a significant percentage of ukraine . 
paul justice never sleeps . laughter 
cruz talk away . explain your plan , please . 
trump i didn't want to excuse me . one second . 
bush it's a public use . 
trump . . . she's trying to get out of the case . she's trying to get out of the case . . . 
rubio well , first of all , i have an understanding of exactly what it is russia and putin are doing , and it's pretty straightforward . he wants to reposition russia , once again , as a geopolitical force . he himself said that the destruction of the soviet union the fall of the soviet union was the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the 20th century , and now he's trying to reverse that . he's trying to destroy nato . and this is what this is a part of . he is exploiting a vacuum that this administration has left in the middle east . here's what you're gonna see in the next few weeks the russians will begin to fly fly combat missions in that region , not just targeting isis , but in order to prop up assad . he will also , then , turn to other countries in the region and say , america is no longer a reliable ally , egypt . america is no longer a reliable ally , saudi arabia . begin to rely on us . what he is doing is he is trying to replace us as the single most important power broker in the middle east , and this president is allowing it . that is what is happening in the middle east . that's what's happening with russia , and . . . 
cruz . . . eliminates the business . . . 
carson well , first of all , healthcare is not a right . but i do believe it is a responsibility for a responsible society , and we are that . we spend almost twice as much per capita on healthcare as many other nations who have actually much better access than we do . i propose a system in which we use health empowerment accounts , which are like a health savings account with no bureaucrats . and we give it to everybody from birth until death . they can pass it on when they die . we pay for it with the same dollars that we pay for traditional healthcare with . we give people the ability to shift money within their health empowerment account within their family . so dad's 500 short , mom can give it to him or a cousin or uncle . and it makes every family their own insurance carrier with no middle man . it gives you enormous flexibility . and also , you know , if uncle joe is smoking like a chimney , everybody's going to hide his cigarettes because they're all interested in what's going on there . also , the your catastrophic healthcare is going to cost a lot less money now because the only thing coming out of that is catastrophic healthcare . so , it's like a homeowners policy with a large deductible , versus a homeowners policy where you want every scratch covered . one costs 1 , 500 a year ; one costs 10 , 000 a year . you can buy the 1 , 500 one . that will take care of 75 percent of the people . the people who are indigent , how do we take care of them now ? medicaid . what's the medicaid budget ? almost 500 billion ; almost 80 million people participate , which is way too many , and that will get a lot better when we fix the economy , which i hope we get a chance to talk about . but do the math . over 5 , 000 for each man , woman and child , and all they will have a lot more flexibility . what could you buy with that ? a concierge practice . 
rubio unbelievable . 
cruz so my simple flat tax i have rolled out in precise detail how it will operate where every american can fill out our taxes on a postcard . and if you want to actually see the postcard , see all the details , you can find them on our web site . it's tedcruz . org . when he we get rid of all the corporate welfare , all the subsidies , all the carve outs in the irs code , it dramatically simplifies it . and under obama , the irs has become so corrupt and so politicized we need to abolish it all together . now , at the end of that there will still be an office in the treasury department to receive the postcards but it will be dramatically simpler . and let me take a moment , chris , to go back to go back to this exchange that was going on . in between all of the insults , let me point out the specificity that was lacking . it's very easy to say , let's cut waste , fraud , and abuse . i've rolled out a detailed plan to cut 500 billion in federal spending , specifying exactly what i would cut . it's easy to say it , but one of the great disconnects to all the people , all of the voters , i understand the folks who are supporting donald right now . you're angry . you're angry at washington , and he uses angry rhetoric . but for 40 years , donald has been part of the corruption in washington that you're angry about . and you're not going to stop the corruption in washington by supporting someone who has supported liberal democrats for four decades , from jimmy carter to john kerry to hillary clinton . you're not going to stop the corruption and the cronyism by supporting someone who has used government power for private gain . instead , we need a president who stands with the american people . 
cruz . . . knows to step in and bail out a bank . 
trump let me just say that i have gotten to know him over the last three or four days . he has a wonderful temperament . laughter he's just fine . don't worry about it . 
trump he spent 22 million in . . . crosstalk 
trump a lot . i'll negotiate a lot more money than you'll ever get . as far as john kerry is concerned , there has been no tougher critic of this man , i think he negotiated one of the worst deals in the history of our country , the iran deal , where they get their 150 billion and all of the other things that take place . it is a disaster for this country , and speaking of israel , it's a disaster for israel . i'm no fan of john kerry . crosstalk 
trump i really don't because it not working and the countries aren't agreeing to it and the rebels aren't agreeing and syria is not agreeing . so it's a meaningless ceasefire . i love the idea of a ceasefire . i love the idea of with a total cessation . but it's not working , as you know very well . it's not working . if we can do what we want with russia but nobody else is adhering to it . so i certainly support it , i would certainly love it , but all parties have to be part of it . 
trump so why didn't you say it ? why didn't you say it ? 
trump good . 
trump . . . you don't know much . . . 
trump it's very , very hard to get people . but other hotels do the exact same thing . and just so you understand , just again , this is a legal process . this is a procedure . it's part of the law . i take advantage of that . there's nothing wrong with it . we have no choice . 
kasich it is not the way we're going to strengthen our country . we will strengthen our country when we come together . and , look , you've got rand paul , you've got ted cruz , you've got marco , you've got a lot of people on this stage that have studied these issues . you know what a leader does ? a leader has a sound program , has a good policy , and then brings people together to solve problems . guess what ? both in congress in balancing the budget and in ohio fixing the economy and , by the way , we talk about the fence . the first thing we better get going is strengthening our economy , because if we don't have a strong economy , we can't pay for all of this . and the world wants us to be able to function from strength , believe it or not . get our economy going , get these people together in a room . we can fix this , ladies and gentlemen . crosstalk we don't have to fight all the time . it can be done , and we will be great . . . 
trump i'll check for you . 
christie listen , i want to talk to the audience at home for a second . if your eyes are glazing over like mine , this is what it's like to be on the floor of the united states senate . i mean , endless debates about how many angels on the head of a pin from people who've never had to make a consequential decision in an executive position . the fact is , for seven years , i had to make these decisions after 9 11 , make a decision about how to proceed forward with an investigation or how to pull back , whether you use certain actionable intelligence or whether not to . and yet they continue to debate about this bill and in the subcommittee and what nobody in america cares about that . what they care about is , are we going to have a president who actually knows what they're doing to make these decisions ? and for the seven years afterwards , new jersey was threatened like no other region in this country and what we did was we took action within the constitution to make sure that law enforcement had all the information they needed . we prosecuted two of the biggest terrorism cases in the world and stopped fort dix from being attacked by six american radicalized muslims from a mosque in new jersey because we worked with the muslim american community to get intelligence and we used the patriot act to get other intelligence to make sure we did those cases . this is the difference between actually been a federal prosecutor , actually doing something , and not just spending your life as one of hundred debating it . let's talk about how we do this , not about which bill , which one these guys like more . the american people don't care about that . 
trump no . laughter no . look , we have to stop with political correctness . we have to get down to creating a country that's not going to have the kind of problems that we've had with people flying planes into the world trade centers , with the with the shootings in california , with all the problems all over the world . i just left indonesia bomb , bomb , bomb , bomb . we have to find out what's going on . i said temporarily . i didn't say permanently . i said temporarily . and i have many great muslim friends . and some of them , i will say , not all , have called me and said , donald , thank you very much ; you're exposing an unbelievable problem and we have to get to the bottom of it . and unlike president obama , where he refuses even to use the term of what's going on , he can't use the term for whatever reason . and if you can't use the term , you're never going to solve the problem . my muslim friends , some , said , thank you very much ; we'll get to the bottom of it . but we have a serious problem . and we can't be the stupid country any more . we're laughed at all over the world . 
rubio but martha , just martha , just to clarify on that point , because he's right , and one more thing to point it is standard procedure of the united states to shoot down those missiles once launched if they pose a threat to civilians , land and ships . 
trump that's because he got ben carson's votes , by the way , but we won't inaudible . our country that we love so much doesn't win anymore . we don't win with the military , we don't' win on the border . you look at new hampshire with the tremendous problem we have with heroin . number one thing i hear from the people of new hampshire , who i love , and developed such relationships , we don't win with healthcare . we don't win with trade . you look at what other countries are doing to us . china . everyone , they're killing us on trade . if i'm elected president , we will win , and we will win , and we will win . thank you , thank you very much . 
bush john roberts has made some really good decisions , for sure , but he did not have a proven , extensive record that would have made the clarity the important thing , and that's what we need to do . and , i'm willing to fight for those nominees to make sure that they get passed . you can't do it the politically expedient way anymore . this is the culture in washington . you have to fight hard for these appointments . this is perhaps the most important thing that the next president will do . 
cruz well , we need to focus on what the objective is , you know ? your question about the first three questions you would ask in this situation room . i think it is a problem if the president , commander in chief , we've elected does not have the experience and background to understand the threats facing this country coming in on day 1 . if you look at the threats facing this country , the single gravest threat , national security threat , is the threat of a nuclear iran . that's why i've pledged on day 1 to rip to shreds this iranian nuclear deal , and anyone that thinks you can negotiate khamenei does not understand the nature of khamenei . when it comes to isis , we've got to have a focused objective . one of the problems of barack obama and hillary clinton's foreign policy , and , sadly , too many establishment republicans in washington , is they focus on issues unrelated to protecting this country . they focus on nation building , they focus on toppling governments to promote democracy , and it ends up undermining our national security . now , with regard to isis , we need a commander in chief that sets the objective we will utterly defeat them because they have declared war . they've declared a jihad on us . now , what do we need . . . bell rings . . . to carry that out . we need overwhelming air power , we need to arm the kurds , who can be our boots on the ground , and if ground troops are necessary , then we should employ them , but it shouldn't be politicians demonstrating political toughness . it should be military expert judgment carrying out the objectives set out by the commander in chief . 
trump well , i think it's wonderful and all , but i did it a little bit half heartedly , but i do mean it to a large extent . we have a country , where , to assimilate , you have to speak english . and i think that where he was , and the way it came out didn't sound right to me . we have to have assimilation to have a country , we have to have assimilation . i'm not the first one to say this , dana . we've had many people over the years , for many , many years , saying the same thing . this is a country where we speak english , not spanish . 
bush that is not true . and the simple fact is to turn this into a limousine parking lot for his casinos is a not public use . and in florida , based on what we did , we made that impossible . it is part of our constitution . that's the better approach . that is the conservative approach . 
huckabee you better believe i will , because i'm tired of liberals always having a litmus test and conservatives are supposed to pretend we don't . well let me tell you what mine would be . number one , i'd ask do you think that the unborn child is a human being or is it just a blob of tissue ? i'd want to know the answer to that . i'd want to know do you believe in the first amendment , do you believe that religious liberty is the fundamental liberty around which all the other freedoms of this country are based ? and i'd want to know do you really believe in the second amendment , do you believe that we have an individual right to bear arms to protect ourselves and our family and to protect our country ? and do you believe in the fifth and the 14th amendment ? do you believe that a person , before they're deprived of life and liberty , should in fact have due process and equal protection under the law ? because if you do , you're going to do more than defund planned parenthood . 
trump went right down because of what he did to it . 
rubio better release your tax returns so we can see how much money he made . 
cruz well , bret , as someone who spent much of his life in law enforcement , i believe you should start with the facts and evidence first before ending up with the verdict . when the news first broke of the united states government engaging in massive surveillance on american citizens , that was a very troubling development , and it's why the united states congress acted to correct it . now , at the same time , i said in that initial statement that if the evidence indicated that edward snowden violated the law , he should be prosecuted for violating the law . and , indeed , since then , the evidence is clear that not only does snowden violate the law , but it appears he committed treason . treason is defined under the constitution as giving aid and comfort to the enemies of america , and what snowden did made it easier for terrorists to avoid detection . and snowden's comments afterwards , and his behavior afterwards , he fled to russia , he fled to china . his conducts afterwards indicates that he was not a whistleblower , but instead he was undermining the ability to defend this country . but we need a president who isn't rash , who doesn't just pop off at the at the hip , but waits to see what the facts are and then acts to defend this country . 
trump i would change them . i would change them . 
huckabee well , and specifically to medicare , becky , because 85 percent of the cost of medicare is chronic disease . the fact is if we don't address what's costing so much , we can't throw enough money at this . and it's why i've continued to focus on the fact that we need to declare war on the four big cost drivers because 80 percent of all medical costs in this country are chronic disease . we don't have a health care crisis in america , we have a health crisis . and until we deal with the health of americans and do what we did with polio when i was a little kid , we eradicated it . you know how much money we spent on polio last year in america ? we didn't spend any . we've saved billions of dollars . you want to fix medicare ? focus on the diseases that are costing us the trillions of dollars . alzheimers , diabetes , heart disease and cancer . eradicate those and you fix medicare and you've fixed america , its economy and you've made people's lives a heck of a lot better . 
fiorina . . . the two go hand in hand . . . 
trump well , let me just tell you about eminent domain because almost all of these people actually criticize it , but so many people have hit me with commercials and other things about eminent domain . eminent domain is an absolute necessity for a country , for our country . without it , you wouldn't have roads , you wouldn't have hospitals , you wouldn't have anything . you wouldn't have schools , you wouldn't have bridges . you need eminent domain . and a lot of the big conservatives that tell me how conservative they are i think i'm more than they are they tell me , oh well , they all want the keystone pipeline . the keystone pipeline , without eminent domain , it wouldn't go 10 feet , ok ? you need eminent domain . and eminent domain is a good thing , not a bad thing . and what a lot of people don't know because they were all saying , oh , you're going to take their property . when somebody when eminent domain is used on somebody's property , that person gets a fortune . they get at least fair market value , and if they are smart , they'll get two or three times the value of their property . but without eminent domain , you don't have roads , highways , schools , bridges or anything . so eminent domain it's not that i love it , but eminent domain is absolutely it's a necessity for a country . and certainly it's a necessity for our country . 
rubio yes , tomorrow or saturday , in fact , is our plan to release them . and there's nothing really that interesting in them . so i have no problem releasing them . and luckily i'm not being audited this year , or last year , for that matter . crosstalk 
trump . . . inaudible called me a genius , i like him so far , i have to tell you . let me just tell you this . jeb is so wrong . jeb is absolutely self just so you understand , you know what that is ? that's jeb's special interest and lobbyist talking . look , let me just tell you something , jeb jeb is so wrong . you got to fight isis first . you fight isis first . right now you have russia , you have iran , you have them with assad , and you have them with syria . you have to knock out isis . they're chopping off heads . these are animals . you have to knock 'em out . you have to knock them off strong . you decide what to do after , you can't fight two wars at one time . if you listen to him , and you listen to some of the folks that i've been listening to , that's why we've been in the middle east for 15 years , and we haven't won anything . we've spent 5 trillion dollars in the middle east with thinking like that . we've spent 5 . . . bell rings . . . lindsey graham , who backs him , had zero on his polls . let me just say something we've spent we've spent . i only tell the truth , lobbyists . we've spent 5 trillion dollars all over the we have to rebuild our country . we have to rebuild our infrastructure . you listen to that , you're going to be there for another 15 . . . 
bush we improved we improved 
kasich well , first of all . . . . . . first of all , megyn , you should know that that president reagan expanded medicaid three or four times . secondly , i had an opportunity to bring resources back to ohio to do what ? to treat the mentally ill . ten thousand of them sit in our prisons . it costs 22 , 500 a year . . . . . . to keep them in prison . i'd rather get them their medication so they could lead a decent life . secondly , we are rehabbing the drug addicted . eighty percent of the people in our prisons have addictions or problems . we now treat them in the prisons , release them in the community and the recidivism rate is 10 percent and everybody across this country knows that the tsunami of drugs is is threatening their very families . so we're treating them and getting them on their feet . and , finally , the working poor , instead of them having come into the emergency rooms where it costs more , where they're sicker and we end up paying , we brought a program in here to make sure that people could get on their feet . and do you know what ? everybody has a right to their god given purpose . and finally , our medicaid is growing at one of the lowest rates in the country . and , finally , we went from 8 billion in the hole to 2 billion in the black . we've cut 5 billion in taxes . . . timer sounds . . . and we've grown 350 , 000 jobs . 
carson well , first of all , delighted to be here . my family's here , and my little granddaughter , who's three years old , said she wanted to come to the debate . so this is very cool . as far as the minimum wage is concerned , people need to be educated on the minimum wage . every time we raise the minimum wage , the number of jobless people increases . it's particularly a problem in the black community . only 19 . 8 percent of black teenagers have a job , who are looking for one . you know , that and that's because of those high wages . if you lower those wages , that comes down . you know , i can remember , as a youngster you know , my first job working in a laboratory as a lab assistant , and multiple other jobs . but i would not have gotten those jobs if someone had to pay me a large amount of money . but what i did gain from those jobs is a tremendous amount of experience , and how to operate in the world and how to relate to different people , and how to become a responsible individual . and that's what gave me what i needed to ascend the ladder of opportunity in this country . that's what we need to be thinking about . how do we allow people to ascend the ladder of opportunity , rather than how do we give them everything and keep them dependent ? 
trump wrong . 
bush donald , this has got . . . 
trump . . . and by the way . . . 
trump . . . the middle east , and that's what happened . 
cruz you need to learn to not interrupt people . 
rubio . . . you lose by inaudible points . she will wipe you out . 
trump good . 
cruz you know , at this point i'm not going to speculate on that without the intelligence briefing that any commander in chief would have , knowing what exactly is there . one of the real problems . . . 
trump in my opinion , we've spent 4 trillion trying to topple various people that frankly , if they were there and if we could've spent that 4 trillion in the united states to fix our roads , our bridges , and all of the other problems ; our airports and all of the other problems we've had , we would've been a lot better off . i can tell you that right now . we have done a tremendous disservice , not only to middle east , we've done a tremendous disservice to humanity . the people that have been killed , the people that have wiped away , and for what ? it's not like we had victory . it's a mess . the middle east is totally destabilized . a total and complete mess . i wish we had the 4 trillion or 5 trillion . i wish it were spent right here in the united states , on our schools , hospitals , roads , airports , and everything else that are all falling apart . 
cruz hold on , i'm going to get my answer . he doesn't get to yell the whole time . 
rubio i want to go even deeper and i want to go even deeper in that direction , because i think the belief that somehow by retreating , america makes the world safer has been disproven every single time it's ever been tried . syria's a perfect example of it . the uprising in syria was not started by the united states ; it was started by the syrian people . and i warned at the time this was three and a half years ago i openly and repeatedly warned that if we did not find moderate elements on the ground that we could equip and arm , that void would be filled by radical jihadists . well , the president didn't listen , the administration didn't follow through , and that's exactly what happened . that is why isis grew . that is why isis then came over the border from syria and back into iraq . what is happening in that region is the direct consequence of the inability to lead and of disengagement . and the more we disengage , the more airplanes from moscow you're going to see flying out of damascus and out of syria . . . 
bush no . it's not true . but i have said that mr . trump's language is divisive . i want to win . i want one of these people here or the ones at 5 00 , to be the next president of the united states . we're not going on win by doing what barack obama and hillary clinton do each and every day . dividing the country . saying , creating a grievance kind of environment . we're going to win when we unite people with a hopeful , optimistic message . i have that message because i was a governor of a state that saw people lifted up , because we had high sustained economic growth . our economy grew at double the rate of the nation . we created 1 . 3 million jobs . we led the nation seven out of those eight years . we were only one of two states that went to aaa bond rating . i cut taxes , 19 billion . if you do that and apply conservative principles the right way , you create an environment where everybody rises up . that's how we're going to win . campaigning in places to give people hope that their life is better because too many people are suffering today in america . 
rubio one of the things that made ronald reagan a great president , is that he understood that america was a unique nation , like any other that had existed throughout human history . he knew it was founded on universal principles that were powerful , the dignity of all people , human rights , the rights of all to live in freedom and liberty , and choose their own path in life . he didn't just believe it , he acted on it . that's why bringing down communism was so important to him . if i'm honored with the opportunity to be president , i hope that our air force one will fly , first and foremost , to our allies ; in israel , in south korea , and japan . they know we stand with them . that america can be counted on . it would also fly to china , not just to meet with our enemies , not just to meet with those adversaries of ours that are there , but also to meet with those that aspire to freedom and liberty within china . i would even invite them to my inauguration . we would also fly into moscow and into russia . and not just meet with the leaders of russia , but also meet with those who aspire to freedom and liberty in russia . and ultimately , i hope that my air force one , if i become president , will one day land in a free cuba , where its people can choose its leaders and its own destiny . 
trump i used to think merkel was a great leader until she did what she did to germany . germany is a disaster right now . so i used to think that . and strong doesn't mean good . putin is a strong leader , absolutely . i could name many strong leaders . i could name very many very weak leaders . but he is a strong leader . now i don't say that in a good way or a bad way . i say it as a fact . 
carson this is the first generation not expected to do better than their parents . some people say it's the new normal , but there's nothing normal about it in an exceptional american . i , like you , am a member of we , the people , and we know that our country is heading off the cliff . joseph stalin said if you want to bring america down you , have to undermine three things our spiritual life , our patriotism and our morality . we , the people , can stop that decline , starting right here in south carolina . if all the people who say , i love ben carson and his policies , but he can't win , vote for me , not only can we win , but we can turn this thing around . you know , we have this manipulation by the political class and by the media telling us who we're supposed to pick and how we're supposed to live . we , the people , are the only people who will determine that . and if you elect me as your next president , i promise you that you will get somebody who is accountable to everybody and beholden to no one . thank you . 
kasich we're not what i can tell you is this . we didn't surrender in new jersey , six years ago , as the brand new first ever pro life governor of new jersey since roe versus wade , i defended planned parenthood . and i've vetoed planned parenthood funding , now , eight times in new jersey . since the day i walked in as governor , planned parenthood has not been funded in new jersey . we stood up and every one of those vetoes has been sustained . but here's the problem , we're we're fighting with each other up here . we agree . let's ask hillary clinton . she believes in the systematic murder of children in the womb to preserve their body parts . . . 
trump i'm in favor of people coming into this country legally . and you know what ? they can have it anyway you want . you can call it visas , you can call it work permits , you can call it anything you want . i've created tens of thousands of jobs , and in all due respect and actually some of these folks i really like a lot but i'm the only one that can say that . i have created tens of thousands of jobs , and i'll be creating many millions of jobs if i'm given if i'm given the opportunity to be president . as far as mark is concerned , as far as the visas are concerned , if we need people , they have it's fine . they have to come into this country legally . we have a country of borders . we have a country of laws . we have to obey the laws . it's fine if they come in , but they have to come in legally . 
cruz well , let me tell you , jake , the single biggest national security threat facing america right now is the threat of a nuclear iran . we've seen six and a half years of president obama leading from behind . weakness is provocative , and this iranian nuclear deal is nothing short of catastrophic . this deal , on its face , will send over 100 billion to the ayatollah khamenei , making the obama administration the world's leading financier of radical islamic terrorism . 
cruz . . . by not handing over the side deals , and we ought to see the united states congress . . . 
fiorina becky , it is the height of hypocrisy for mrs . clinton to talk about being the first woman president , when every single policy she espouses , and every single policy of president obama has been demonstrably bad for women . 92 percent 92 percent of the jobs lost during barack obama's first term belonged to women . senator cruz is precisely right . three million women have fallen into poverty under this administration . the number of women 
rubio it didn't change . 
carson well , first of all , i'm not a politician , so i'm never going to become a politician . but here's what here's what people need to know . people need to know that free college is not it's a non starter . you know , you have to look at our economic situation . we're on the verge of economic collapse and , you know , we're it's not just the 19 trillion , but it's also the 200 trillion in unfunded liabilities . what we need to think about is , what does that do to the average person ? when we have a debt of that nature , it causes the fed to change their policy , it causes the central bank to keep the the rates low , and who does does that affect ? mr . average , who used to go to the bank every friday and put part of his check in the bank and watch it grow over three decades and be able to retire with a nice nest egg , that's gone . that part of the american dream is gone . all of these things are disappearing , and bernie sanders and people like hillary clinton blame it on the rich . they say those evil rich people , if we take their money we can solve the problem . it's not the evil rich people . it's the irresponsible , evil government . 
christie well , listen . you know , if we want to deal with these issues , we have to deal with them in a way that makes sense . i agree with what dr . carson said earlier . the first thing we need to do to make america stronger is to strengthen our military , and i put out a really specific plan no less than 500 , 000 active duty soldiers in the army . no less than 185 , 000 active duty marines in the marine corps . bring us to a 350 ship navy again , and modernize the ohio class of submarines , and bring our air force back to 2 , 600 aircraft that are ready to go . those are the kind of things that are going to send a clear message around the world . those are the things that we need to start working on immediately to make our country stronger and make it better . those are the things that we need to be able to be doing . and as we move towards dealing with foreign aid , i don't disagree with senator paul's position that we shouldn't be funding our enemies . but i absolutely believe that israel is a priority to be able to fund and keep them strong and safe after eight years of this administration . 
fiorina . . . when it was time to quit talking . . . 
trump well , first of all , i don't really think that . i think that i hold views that are very similar to many of the people . we are more inclusive . and if you look at the polls and if you look at the millions of people that have been pouring into the polls , it's , again , the biggest story . you look at all of these people that are coming in , something is happening . i am different in one primary respect , and that's trade . i feel that we have had horrible negotiators , horrible trade deals . the jobs in this country are disappearing , and especially the good jobs . you look at the recent jobs reports , which are really done so that presidents and politicians look good , because all of these people looking for jobs , when they give up , they go home , they give up , and they are considered statistically employed . so that's that . but i will say , trade deals are absolutely killing our country . the devaluations of their currencies by china and japan and many , many other countries , and we don't do it because we don't play the game . and the only way we're going to be able to do it is we're going to have to do taxes unless they behave . if you don't tax certain products coming into this country from certain countries that are taking advantage of the united states and laughing at our stupidity , we're going to continue to lose businesses and we're going to continue to lose jobs . and if you look at the average worker over the last 12 years , their salary and their pay have gone down , not up . it has gone down . and i think that's why there has been such an outpouring of love to what i'm saying . 
walker good evening , i'm scott walker , and tonight , i want to thank and mrs . reagan , and the reagan library for hosting us . you see , in my lifetime , the greatest president was a governor from california . ronald reagan knew how to go big , and go bold . he understood the essence of moving this country forward , and that's what i did when i took on the status quo in my state , and the washington based special interest . now , more than ever , america needs a leader who will go big and bold again . someone who's been tested . i'm ready to be that leader . thank you . 
trump he will never be able to do it . i think i may be able to do it , although i will say this . probably the toughest deal of any kind is that particular deal . 
paul you know , i think marco gets it completely wrong . we are not any safer through the bulk collection of all americans' records . in fact , i think we're less safe . we get so distracted by all of the information , we're not spending enough time getting specific immigration specific information on terrorists . the other thing is , is the one thing that might have stopped san bernardino , that might have stopped 9 11 would have been stricter controls on those who came here . and marco has opposed at every point increased security border security for those who come to our country . on his gang of eight bill , he would have liberalized immigration , but he did not and he steadfastly opposed any new border security requirements for refugees or students . last week , i introduced another bill saying we need more security , we need more scrutiny . once again , marco opposed this . so marco can't have it both ways . he thinks he wants to be this , oh , i'm great and strong on national defense . but he's the weakest of all the candidates on immigration . he is the one for an open border that is leaving us defenseless . if we want to defend the country , we have to defend against who's coming in , and marco is has more of an allegiance to chuck schumer and to the liberals than he does to conservative policy . 
paul well , i think if you're in favor of world war iii , you have your candidate . you know , here's . . . . . . the thing . my goodness , what we want in a leader is someone with judgment , not someone who is so reckless as to stand on the stage and say , yes , i'm jumping up and down ; i'm going to shoot down russian planes . russia already flies in that airspace . it may not be something we're in love with the fact that they're there , but they were invited by iraq and by syria to fly in that airspace . and so if we announce we're going to have a no fly zone , and others have said this . hillary clinton is also for it . it is a recipe for disaster . it's a recipe for world war iii . we need to confront russia from a position of strength , but we don't need to confront russia from a point of recklessness that would lead to war . this is something this type of judgment , you know , it's having that kind of judgment ; who you would appoint and how you're going to conduct affairs , that is incredibly important . i mean , i think when we think about the judgment of someone who might want world war iii , we might think about someone who might shut down a bridge because they don't like their friends ; they don't want to you know , they want to inaudible a democrat . so i think we need to be very careful . 
bush he has had the gall to go after my mother . hold on . let me finish . he has had the gall to go after my mother . 
rubio i spoke to one of the victims yesterday . 
kasich well i want to comment on this . this is the fantasy . . . 
paul thank you . 
rubio selling watches in manhattan . 
trump i hate the concept of it , but on a humanitarian basis , with what's happening , you have to . it's living in hell in syria ; there's no question about it . they're living in hell . 
trump thank you . politicians are all talk , no action . you've seen where they've take you to . we are 19 trillion dollars right now . it's going to be increased with that horrible budget from a month ago that was just approved by politicians . we need a change . we need a very big change . we're going to make our country great again . i say this every night , every day , every afternoon , and it's so true we don't win anymore . we don't win with health care , we don't win with isis and the military , we don't take care of our vets , we don't care of our borders , we don't win . we are going to start winning again . we are not going to be controlled by people that are special interests and lobbyists that everybody here has contributed to . and you know what , they do exactly what those folks want them to do . we are going to make our country great , and we're going to do the right thing . i'm working for you . i'm not working for anybody else . thank you very much . 
paul absolutely . go ahead . 
trump you're losing so badly you i want to . . . 
carson yes , amen , amen . laughter 
rubio let's see if he answers it . 
fiorina . . . the truth is , you can't just wave your hands and say the 14th amendment is gonna go away . it will take an extremely arduous vote in congress , followed by two thirds of the states , and if that doesn't work to amend the constitution , then it is a long , arduous process in court . and meanwhile , what will continue to go on is what has gone on for 25 years . with all due respect , mr . trump , we've been talking about illegal immigration for 25 years . san francisco has been a sanctuary city since 1989 . there are 300 of them . and meanwhile , what has happened ? nothing . the border remains insecure . the legal immigration system remains broken . look , we know what it takes to secure a border . we've heard a lot of great ideas here . money , manpower , technology . . . 
rubio most of the lawsuits . 
cruz that's what donald trump does . 
bush they're a mile away from here . 
kasich well , first of all , just to be clear , not only did i serve for 18 years on the defense committee , more than anybody on this stage , but , secondly , i was called into the pentagon after 9 11 to help secretary rumsfeld with some of his difficulties . i will say , look , let me tell you what happened with libya . and i pointed out in the last debate hillary clinton worked aggressively to depose moammar gadhafi . we had no business doing it . he was working with us . he was cooperating with us . he denuclearized . and now they pushed him out , and now we have a fertile ground for isis . fortunately in libya , there's only a few cities on the coast , because most of libya is a desert . the fact of the matter is , we absolutely have to be and not just with special forces . i mean , that's not going to work . come on . you've got to go back to the invasion when we pushed saddam hussein out of kuwait . we have to be there on the ground in significant numbers . we do have to include our muslim arab friends to work with us on that . and we have to be in the air . and we it should be a broad coalition , made up of the kinds of people that were involved when we defeated saddam . now , you've got to be on the ground and in the air both in syria and iraq . and at some point , we will have to deal with libya . i am very concerned about isis getting their hands on the oilfields in libya and being able to fund their operations . the fact is cool , calm , deliberate , effective , take care of the job , and then come home . that's what we need to do with our military foreign policy . 
paul can i make a response to that ? 
trump ok , good . because it wouldn't work . 
walker i won't back down . . . 
bush well , first of all , i'm 7 and 0 in my fantasy league . 
cruz well , josh , as you noted , this is a problem that , for me , i understand first hand . my older sister , myriam , who was my half sister , struggled her whole life with drug and alcohol addiction . my father and her mom divorced when she was a little girl and she was angry her whole life , and she ended up marrying a man who had been in and out of jail . she then became a single mom and she herself went to jail several times and she ended up spending some time in a crack house . i still remember my father and me driving up to get myriam out of that crack house to try to convince her she needed to be a mom to to my nephew joey . she wasn't willing to listen . she was not willing to change the path she was on . she was angry . i was had just gotten my first job coming out of law school . i took a 20 , 000 loan on a credit card to put my nephew , joey , in valley forge military academy he was in sixth grade at the time , to pay his way through that . and about five , six years ago , miriam died of an overdose . it was the coroner ruled it accidental . we don't know . she went to one night , had taken too many pills , and joey walked in and found her dead . this is an absolute epidemic . we need leadership to solve it . solving it has to occur at the state and local level with programs like a . a . , and counseling , and churches and charities . but it also has to be securing the borders , because you have got mexican cartels that are smuggling vast amounts of heroin into this country . we know how to secure the borders . what is missing is the political will to do it . and as president , i will secure the border , we will end this deluge of drugs that is flowing over our southern border and that is killing americans across this country . 
kasich let me let's tell you . . . 
christie you know , i enjoy the interplay . thank you , gentlemen . i'll just say this , first off , new jersey is the first state in the nation that now says if you are non violent , non dealing drug user , that you don't go to jail for your first offense . you go to mandatory treatment . you see , jake , i'm pro life . and i think you need to be pro life for more than just the time in the womb . it gets tougher when they get out of the womb . and when they're the 16 year old drug addict in the florida county lockup , that life is just as precious as the life in the womb . and so , that's why i'm for rehabilitation , why i think the war on drugs has been a failure . but i'll end with this . that doesn't mean we should be legalizing gate way drugs . and if senator paul thinks that the only victim is the person , look at the decrease in productivity , look at the way people get used and move on to other drugs when they use marijuana as a gateway drug , it is not them that are the only victims . their families are the victims too , their children are the victims too , and their employers are the victims also . that's why i'll enforce the federal law , while you can still put an emphasis on rehabilitation , which we've done in new jersey . 
cruz yes , because i gave my word that i would . and what i have endeavored to do every day in the senate is do what i said i would do . you know , just on tuesday , we saw an overwhelming victory in the state of texas where i won texas by 17 percent . and i will say it was a powerful affirmation that the people who know me best , the people who i campaigned , who made promises that if you elect me , i'll lead the fight against obamacare , i'll lead the fight against amnesty , i'll lead the fight against our debt , and i will fight for the bill of rights and your rights every day , that the people of texas said you have kept your word , and that's what i'll do as president . 
paul . . . can i finish my time ? could i finish with my time ? 
cruz look , i understand marco wants to raise confusion , it is not accurate what he just said that i supported legalization . indeed , i led the fight against his legalization and amnesty . and you know , there was one commentator that put it this way that , for marco to suggest our record's the same is like suggesting the fireman and the arsonist because they are both at the scene of the fire . he was fighting to grant amnesty and not to secure the border , i was fighting to secure the border . and this also goes to trust , listening on to campaign trails . candidates all the time make promises . you know , marco said , he learned that the american people didn't trust the federal government . 
trump no . i just will tell you that , you know , jeb made the statement . i'm not only referring to him . i a lot of money was raised by a lot of different people that are standing up here . and the donors , the special interests , the lobbyists have very strong power over these people . i'm spending all of my money , i'm not spending i'm not getting any i turned down i turn down so much , i could have right now from special interests and donors , i could have double and triple what he's got . i've turned it down . i turned down last week 5 million from somebody . so i will tell you i understand the game , i've been on the other side all of my life . and they have a lot of control over our politicians . and i don't say that favorably , and i'm not sure if there's another system , but i say this . i am not accepting any money from anybody . nobody has control of me other than the people of this country . i'm going to do the right thing . 
kasich major major , we can't we've got to look , i have got to correct the record . and the fact of the matter is , we went from an 8 billion hole to a 2 billion surplus . we're up 400 , 000 jobs . our credit is rock solid . and i don't know . . . 
rubio . . . starting a university , and that was a fake university . 
cruz this deal abandons four american hostages in iran , and this deal will only accelerate iran's acquiring nuclear weapons . you'd better believe it . if i am elected president , on the very first day in office , i will rip to shreds this catastrophic iranian nuclear deal . 
cruz megyn , let me ask the voters at home , is this the debate you want playing out in the general election ? the stakes in this election are too high . for seven years , millions of americans , we've been struggling , wages have been stagnating , people are hurting , our constitutional rights are under assault . and if we nominate donald , we're going to spend the spring , the fall , and the summer with the republican nominee facing a fraud trial . . . 
fiorina i led hewlett packard through a very difficult time , the worst technology recession in 25 years . the nasdaq stock index fell 80 percent . it took 15 years for the stock index to recover . we had very strong competitors who literally went out of business and lost all of their jobs in the process . despite those difficult times , we doubled the size of the company , we quadrupled its topline growth rate , we quadrupled its cash flow , we tripled its rate of innovation . yes , we had to make tough choices , and in doing so , we saved 80 , 000 jobs , went on to grow to 160 , 000 jobs . and now hewlett packard is almost 300 , 000 jobs . we went from lagging behind to leading in every product category and every market segment . we must lead in this nation again , and some tough calls are going to be required . but as for the firing , i have been very honest about this from the day it happened . when you challenge the status quo , you make enemies . i made a few . steve jobs told me that when he called me the day i was fired to say , hey , been there , done that twice . it's also true that the man that led my firing , tom perkins , just took 
fiorina you know , the nasdaq dropped 80 percent 80 percent and it took 15 years for the nasdaq to recover . i was recruited to h . p . to save a company . it was a company that had grown into a bloated , inept bureaucracy that cost too much and delivered too little to customers and shareholders . it had missed , before i had arrived , expectations for nine quarters in a row . as an outsider , i tackled h . p . 's entrenched problems head on . i cut the bureaucracy down to size , re introduced accountability , focused on service , on innovation , on leading in every market , in every product segment . and yes , it was a very difficult time . however , we saved 80 , 000 jobs and we went on to grow to 160 , 000 jobs , and scores of technology companies literally went out of business like gateway taking all their jobs with them . the truth is i had to make some tough calls in some tough times . i think , actually , people are looking for that in washington now . and yes , i was fired over a disagreement in the boardroom . there are politics in the boardroom as well . and yet the man who led my firing , tom perkins , an icon of silicon valley , has come out publicly and said , you know what ? we were wrong . she was right . she was a great ceo . she'd be a great president of the united states because the leadership she brought to h . p . is exactly the leadership we need in washington , d . c . 
carson you know , in recent travels around this country , i've encountered so many americans who are discouraged and angry as they watch our freedom , our security and the american dream slipping away under an unresponsive government that is populated by bureaucrats and special interest groups . we're not going to solve this problem with traditional politics . the only way we're going to solve this problem is with we , the people . and i ask you to join me in truth and honesty and integrity . bencarson . com we will heal , inspire and revive america for our children . 
rubio now i get my 60 seconds to respond . he's talking about my tax plan . 
cruz count to 10 , donald . count to 10 . 
trump i don't support it anymore . i do not support the ban on assault . audience booing 
kasich david ? 
bush we increased child support we increased child support with a broken system by 90 percent . 
carson good evening . 
trump he also said about language . . . 
paul here is the thing , he doesn't want to make it about medical marijuana , but what if new jersey's medical marijuana contradicts the federal law ? he's saying he'll send the federal government in , and he will enforce the federal law . that's not consistent with the tenth amendment . it is not consistent with states' rights . and it is not consistent with the conservative vision for the country . i don't think we should be sending the federal police in to arrest a mother and separate them from their child for giving a medicine to their child for seizures . crosstalk 
walker you you let me finish . . . 
trump let me just tell you they de value their currency . they de value their currencies . 
kasich well , john , first of all , if i were president , we wouldn't have the divisions in the country we have today . i do want to take a second as we reflected on judge scalia , it's amazing it's not even two minutes after the death of judge scalia , nine children here today , their father didn't wake up . his wife , sad , but i just wish we hadn't run so fast into politics . here's my concern about this . the country is so divided right now , and now we're going to see another partisan fight take place . i really wish the president would think about not nominating somebody . if you were to nominate somebody , let's have him pick somebody that's going to have unanimous approval , and such widespread approval across the country that this could happen without a lot of recrimination . i don't think that's going to happen , and i would like the president just to , for once here , put the country first . we're going to have an election for president very soon , and the people will understand what is at stake in that election . and so i believe the president should not move forward , and i think that we ought to let the next president of the united states decide who is going to run that supreme court with a vote by the people of the united . . . bell rings . . . states of america . 
paul yeah , but , marco ! marco ! how is it conservative , how is it conservative to add a trillion dollar expenditure for the federal government that you're not paying for ? 
cruz you know i understand why donald made the comments he did and i understand why americans are feeling frustrated and scared and angry when we have a president who refuses to acknowledge the threat we face and even worse , who acts as an apologist for radical islamic terrorism . i think what we need is a commander in chief who is focused like a laser on keeping this country safe and on defeating radical islamic terrorism . what should we do ? first , we should pass the expatriate terrorist act , legislation i've introduced that says if an american goes and joins isis and wages jihad against america , that you forfeit your citizenship and you can not come in on a passport . and secondly , we should pass the legislation that i've introduced . . . bell rings . . . that suspends all refugees from nations that isis or al qaida controls significant territory . just last week , we see saw two iraqi refugees vetted using the same process the president says will work , that were arrested for being alleged isis terrorists . if i'm elected president , we will not let in refugees from countries controlled by isis or al qaida . when it comes to isis , we will not weaken them , we will not degrade them , we will utterly and completely destroy isis . 
trump no . 
bush . . . say it again ? 
bush he did , he did . you're proud of your family , just as i am . 
christie what about kasich ? can i introduce kasich ? 
cruz listen , i think for every one of us , we need to show respect to the people . we need to remember who it is we're working for . you know , we've seen for seven years a president who believes he's above the law , who behaves like an emperor , who it is all about him and he forgot that he's working for the american people . and let me let me ask , turn the camera our here . how many of y'all feel disrespected by washington ? washington isn't listening to the people . and that's the frustration that is boiling over . and we need to nominate and elects a president who remembers , he works for the people . you know , at donald's rallies recently , he's taken to asking people in the crowd to raise their hand and pledge their support to him . now , i got to say to me , i think that's exactly backwards . this is a job interview . we are here pledging our support to you , not the other way around . and the only hand raising i'm interested in doing is on january 20 , 2017 raising my hand with my left hand on the . . . bell rings . . . bible and pledging to the american people to preserve , protect and defend the constitution of united states . 
trump give me a break . 
rubio no , i support free trade deals that are good for america . we're 5 percent of the world's population . if all we do is sell things to each other , we can only sell to 5 percent of the people on earth . we have to have access to the hundreds of millions of people in the world today who can afford to buy things . the problem is we're a low tariff country . to import something into the united states is not very expensive , but many of these countries we can't export to because their tariffs are too high . and so i am in favor of deals that allow us to bring down those tariffs so that america can sell things to all these people around the world . there are good trade deals and there are bad ones . so for example , here in florida , we have benefited from the free trade deal with colombia . it's allowed flower exporters to come into the united states but it's created jobs for hundreds of people who are now delivering those flowers and working in that industry . we have a surplus with colombia . on the other hand , you've seen trade deals like in mexico that have been less than promising in some aspects , better in others . bottom line is i believe that america , if given access to foreign markets , our workers are the most productive in the world , our people are the most innovative on this planet . if it is a free and fair trade deal , we can compete against anyone in the world , and we need to in the 21st century . 
cruz south carolina , you have a critical choice to make . our country literally hangs in the balance . do you want another washington deal maker who will do business as usual , cut deals with the democrats , grow government , grow debt and give up our fundamental liberties ? or do you want a conservative , a proven conservative that will stand and fight with you each and every day ? listen , repealing obamacare is not going to be easy . passing a simple flat tax that abolishes the i . r . s . is not going to be easy , but if we stand with the american people , we can do it . and today , we saw just how great the stakes are . two branches of government hang in the balance . not just the presidency but the supreme court . if we get this wrong , if we nominate the wrong candidates , the second amendment , life , marriage , religious liberty every one of those hangs in the balance . my little girls are here . i don't want to look my daughters in the eyes and say , we lost their liberties . who do you know will defend the constitution and bill of rights ? and as a commander in chief , who do you know will stand up to our enemies as the clam , steady , deliberate , strength to defeat our enemies , to secure our borders and to keep america safe . 
carson no , it speaks to the fact that i don't know those audience boos see ? they know . 
trump wrong . wrong . 
bush thank you all very much . the next president is going to be confronted with an unforeseen challenge . that's almost certain . it could be a pandemic , a major natural disaster or an attack on our country . the question for south carolinians and americans is who do you want to have sitting behind the big desk in the oval office ? because that's the question . it's not the things we're talking about today . it's the great challenge that may happen . i believe i will have a steady hand as commander in chief and president of the united states . i will unite this country around common purposes because i did it as governor of the state of florida . when i was governor , we had eight hurricanes and four tropical storms in 16 months . our state was on its back . we recovered far faster than what people thought because we led . we want to challenge rather than cutting and running . that's what we need in washington , d . c . we need someone with a servant's heart that has a backbone , that isn't going to focus on polls and focus groups . the focus will be on the american people to keep them safe and secure . i ask for your vote next saturday . 
bush but if you want someone who has a proven , effective leadership , that was a governor of a state , that transformed the culture there , elect me so i can fight for the american people and change the culture in washington , d . c . 
huckabee you know , i know to a lot of people in the media , this is just a great big game , and we're the players . and , we come out here , and we do our thing . and , sometimes we're held up in contempt by people who write columns , but , i guarantee you to every person on this stage there's something deep inside of us that would cause us to give up our livelihoods and step out on this stage and fight for the people of america . i've got five grandkids . i do not want to walk my five grandkids through the charred remains of a once great country called america , and say , here you go , 20 trillion dollars of debt . good luck making something out of this mess . and , for those of us who are serious enough to run for president , think long and hard why we're here , and hopefully you'll know we're not here for ourselves . we honest to god are here to get this country back on track . i know this , i certainly am . 
trump let me just tell you , you look at the middle east . they're chopping off heads . they're chopping off the heads of christians and anybody else that happens to be in the way . they're drowning people in steel cages . and he now we're talking about waterboarding . this really started with ted , a question was asked of ted last two debates ago about waterboarding . and ted was , you know , having a hard time with that question , to be totally honest with you . they then came to me , what do you think of waterboarding ? i said it's fine . and if we want to go stronger , i'd go stronger , too , because , frankly . . . . . . that's the way i feel . can you imagine can you imagine these people , these animals over in the middle east , that chop off heads , sitting around talking and seeing that we're having a hard problem with waterboarding ? we should go for waterboarding and we should go tougher than waterboarding . that's my opinion . 
trump 
trump . . . wrong . . . 
rubio we're going to have to do this again , o . k . ? when that issue was being debated , ted cruz , at a committee hearing , very passionately said , i want immigration reform to pass , i want people to be able to come out of the shadows . and he proposed an amendment that would legalized people here . not only that , he proposed doubling the number of green cards . he proposed a 500 percent increase on guest workers . now his position is different . now he is a passionate opponent of all those things . so he either wasn't telling the truth then or he isn't telling the truth now , but to argue he is a purist on immigration is just not true . 
bush it is i'd say it is islamic terrorism , and , back to the question of what we are dealing with in iraq , when we pull back voids are filled . that's the lesson of history , and , sadly , this president does not believe in american leadership . he does not believe it , and the net result is that we have a caliphate the size of indiana that gains energy each and everyday to recruit americans in our own country , and the threat to the homeland relates to the fact that we have not dealt with this threat of terror in the middle east . we should have a no fly zone in syria . we should have a support for the remnants of the syrian free army , and create safe zones . if you want to deal with the four million refugees that are leaving syria because of the devastation there , then we 'ought to create safe zones for them to stay in the region rather than go to europe . and , that requires american leadership . without american leadership every other country in the neighborhood beings to change their priorities . it is tragic that you see iraq , and other countries now talking to russia . it wasn't that long ago that russia had no influence in the region at all . and , so , the united states needs to lead across the board . this president , and hillary clinton both do not believe the united states has a leadership role to play , and we're now paying a price , and it will have a huge impact on the economy of this country if we don't deal with this . 
bush i was asked the question . 
rubio . . . i see him repeat himself every night , he says five things , everyone's dumb , he's gonna make america great again . . . 
trump . . . it was elevated to an a . 
carson i have no argument with having a strong leader , and to be aggressive where aggression is needed . but it is not needed in every circumstance . there is a time when you can use your intellect to come up with other ways to do things . and i think that's what we have to start thinking about . there is no question that a lot of these problems that we have been talking about in terms of the international situation is because we are weak . it is because our navy is so small . it is because our air force is incapable of doing the same things that it did a few years ago . it's because our marines corps is not ready to be deployed . 
trump because they don't cover most of the subjects . we're the policemen of the world . we take care of the entire world . we're going to have a stronger military , much stronger . our military is depleted . but we take care of germany , we take care of saudi arabia , we take care of japan , we take care of south korea . we take every time this maniac from north korea does anything , we immediately send our ships . we get virtually nothing . we have 28 , 000 soldiers on the line , on the border between north and south korea . we have so many places . saudi arabia was making a billion dollars a day , and we were getting virtually nothing to protect them . we are going to be in a different world . we're going to negotiate real deals now , and we're going to bring the wealth back to our country . we owe 19 trillion . we're going to bring wealth back to our country . 
cruz well , dana , i've known john roberts for 20 years , he's amazingly talented lawyer , but , yes , it was a mistake when he was appointed to the supreme court . he's a good enough lawyer that he knows in these obamacare cases he changed the statute , he changed the law in order to force that failed law on millions of americans for a political outcome . and , you know , we're frustrated as conservatives . we keep winning elections , and then we don't get the outcome we want . and , let me focus on two moments in time . number one , in 1990 , in one room was david souter , and in another room was edith jones , the rock ribbed ph conservative on the fifth circuit court of appeals . george herbert walker bush appointed david souter . and then in 2005 , in one room was john roberts , in another room was my former boss , mike luttig , the rock ribbed ph conservative on the fourth circuit court of appeals . . . 
trump no no , let me ask you , jeb . bell rings do you consider the keystone pipeline private ? 
fiorina . . . jake , since everyone has gotten to weigh in on this military issue , i'd like to be able to do the same . we have spent probably 12 minutes talking about the past . let's talk about the future . we need the strongest military on the face of the planet , and everyone has to know it . and , specifically , what that means is we need about 50 army brigades , we need about 36 marine battalions , we need somewhere between 300 , and 350 naval ships , we need to upgrade every leg of the nuclear triad . . . 
cruz well , chris , thank you for that question . let me start by observing that detroit is a great city with a magnificent legacy that has been utterly decimated by 60 years of failed left wing policy . you know , henry ford revolutionized automobile manufacturing and brought automobiles to the middle class . during world war ii , detroit provided funded the arsenals of democracy to help us win world war ii . in in the 1960s , detroit was the silicon valley of america . it had a population of 2 million people , had the highest per capita income in the country . and then , for 50 years , left wing democrats have pursued destructive tax policies , weak crime policies , and have driven the citizens out . this city now has just 700 , 000 citizens . there are vacant homes , one after the other after the other . crime has been rampant , and it is an outrage . and let me say to folks in the media that is a story that the media ought to be telling over and over again , the destruction of left wing policies and the millions who have hurt because of it . 
cruz excuse me , he called me a liar , then interrupted the whole time . am i allowed to . . . crosstalk wolf , do i not get a response ? do i not get a response without being interrupted ? 
cruz ben is a good and honorable man and ben and candy have become friends . he has an amazing life story that has inspired millions , including me . when this transpired , i apologized to him then and i do so now . ben , i'm sorry . let me tell you the facts of what occurred for those who are interested in knowing . on monday night , about 6 30 p . m . , cnn reported that ben was not going from iowa to new hampshire or south carolina . rather , he was , quote , taking a break from campaigning . they reported that on television , cnn's political anchors , jake tapper and dana bash and wolf blitzer , said it was highly unusual and highly significant . my political team saw cnn's report breaking news and they forwarded that news to our volunteers , it was being covered on live television . now , at the time , i was at the caucuses , i was getting ready to speak at the caucuses just like ben was , just like everyone else was . i knew nothing about this . a couple hours later , i found out about it . i was told that ben was unhappy . i called him that evening because i respect him very , very highly . i didn't reach him that evening . bell rings i reached him the next day and apologized . he asked me then , he said , ted , would you make this apologize in public ? i said , yes , i will . and i did so . i regret that subsequently , cnn reported on that they didn't correct that story until 9 15 that night . so from 6 30 p . m . to 9 15 , that's what cnn was reporting . subsequent to that initial report , ben's campaign put out a statement saying that he was not suspending his campaign . i wish that our campaign staff had forwarded that statement . they were unaware of it , i wish that they had , that's why i apologized . 
fiorina well , first obamacare has to be repealed because it's failing . . . . . . it's failing the very people it was intended to help , but , also , it is croney capitalism at its worst . who helped write this bill ? drug companies , insurance companies , pharmaceutical companies , every single one of those kinds of companies are bulking up to deal with big government . see , that's what happens . as government gets bigger , and bigger and it has been for 50 years under republicans and democrats alike and business have to bulk up to deal with big government . so , we have to repeal it . it's tens of thousands of pages long , no one can possible understand it except the big companies , the lawyers , the accountants , the lobbyists that they hire to protect their interests . then , we have to give back to states the responsibility to manage a high risk pool . we need to try the one thing in health insurance we've never tried . health insurance has always been a cozy , little game between regulators and health insurance companies . we need to try the free market . the free market . where people actually have to compete . and , we 'ought to have the government ensure that you must and i don't use that term often , that government 'ought to do something , but every healthcare provider 'ought to publish its costs , its prices , its outcomes , because as patients we don't know what we're buying . now , let me just say let me just say , i know more about innovation and entrepreneurship than anyone on this panel because i have led innovative businesses in the most highly competitive industry in the world for decades . the truth is the secret sauce of america is innovation , and entrepreneurship , it is why we must cut our government down to size , and hold it accountable . it's why we have to take our government back , because innovation and entrepreneurship is crushed by the crushing load of a 73 , 000 page tax code . it is crushed . . . bell ringing . . . by regulatory thicket that is so vast we don't even know what's in it anymore . it is crushed as well by government bureaucrats who don't do their jobs very well , and who are not held accountable , which is why i've said we got to take our government back , and to do that , we have to know where every dollar being spent , and be able to move any dollar . we have to hack through this regulatory thicket , repeal so much , but , also , know what's in that regulatory thicket we don't even know what regulations have been passed . third , we need to build a meritocracy scott walker , by the way , is trying now to do in wisconsin . . . bell ringing . . . finally , we need to get to a three page tax code , and , yes , that plan exists . 
trump it shows the total dishonesty of the press . we were having on a few occasions , again massive crowds . and we're talking and i'm saying who is going to vote on tuesday ? who is going to vote ? the place goes crazy . then i say , hey , do me a favor . raise your right hand . do you swear you're going to vote for donald trump ? everyone's laughing , we're all having a good time . that's why i have much bigger crowds than ted , because we have a good time at mine . but we're all having a good time and the next day , on the today show and a couple of other place , not too many . because when you look at it , everyone's smiling , laughing . their arms are raised like this . they had pictures , still pictures of people and they tried to equate it to nazi germany . bell rings it is a disgrace . it was a total disgrace . and i've had reporters , people that you know , come up to me and said that what they did on the today show was a disgrace . 
kasich there's a critical point that needs to be made here . 
rubio . . . to someone who time and again on issue after issue has not proven that he has the principals . . . bell ringing . . . that outline what the conservative movement has been about . and , as ted said , the things that made america great . america is great because of the conservative principles of limited government and free enterprise , and a strong national defense . . . 
kasich well , first of all , when we talk about the import export bank , it's time to clean up corporate welfare . if we're gonna reform welfare for poor people , we ought to reform it for rich people , as well . secondly , in our state , we went from a loss of 350 , 000 jobs to , now , a gain of 347 , 000 jobs to the positive . our wages are growing faster than the national average , and i've cut taxes more than any sitting governor in this state 5 billion , including no taxes on small business and killing the death tax . i want to go back to what we were talking about earlier , this budget deal in washington . this is the same old stuff since i left . you spend the money today and then you hope you're going to save money tomorrow . i don't know if people understand , but i spent a lifetime with my colleagues getting us to a federal balanced budget . we actually did it . and i have a road map and a plan right now to get us to balance . reforming entitlements , cutting taxes . you see , because if you really want to get to a balanced budget , you need to reduce your expenses and you need to grow your economy . so what i will tell you about our incentives our incentives are tight , and at the end of the day we make sure that we gain more from the creation of jobs than what we lose . and you know what ? ohio , one of the best growing places in the country i not only did it in washington , i did it in ohio , and i'll go back to washington , and there will be no more silly deals . . . 
trump okay . first of all , nikki this afternoon said i'm a friend of hers . actually a close friend . and wherever you are sitting nikki , i'm a friend . we're friends . that's good . laughter but she did say there was anger . and i could say , oh , i'm not angry . i'm very angry because our country is being run horribly and i will gladly accept the mantle of anger . our military is a disaster . our healthcare is a horror show . obamacare , we're going to repeal it and replace it . we have no borders . our vets are being treated horribly . illegal immigration is beyond belief . our country is being run by incompetent people . and yes , i am angry . and i won't be angry when we fix it , but until we fix it , i'm very , very angry . and i say that to nikki . so when nikki said that , i wasn't offended . she said the truth . one of your colleagues interviewed me . and said , well , she said you were angry and i said to myself , huh , she's right . i'm not fighting that . i didn't find it offensive at all . i'm angry because our country is a mess . 
rubio yeah , i just want to a couple points . once again , he was pressed on a policy issue to show his understanding of the foreign policy , and his reaction was just to attack somebody else with a name . here's the bottom line . and i'm going to repeat it again . the world today is as complicated and as complex as it has been certainly in a very certainly in the lifetime of anybody here today . you indeed do have a lunatic in north korea with nuclear weapons . you indeed do have the chinese government taking over the most important shipping lane in the world . and vladimir putin , who you've expressed admiration for , donald . . . 
trump . . . the lead plaintiff is now getting out of the case because it's so bad for her . . . 
trump we have millions of people right now on line trying to come into this country . very , very unfair to the people that want to come into our country legally . they've gone through the process . they're on line . they're waiting . very , very unfair to them . that i can tell you . 
bush you know , i am by my nature impatient . and this is not an endeavor that rewards that . you gotta be patient . you gotta be stick with it , and all that . but also , i can't fake anger . i believe this is still the most extraordinary country on the face of the earth . and it troubles me that people are rewarded for tearing down our country . it's never been that way in american politics before . i can't do it . i just don't believe that this country's days are going to be deeply you know , going down . i think we're on the verge of the greatest time , and i want to fix the things to let people rise up . 
trump because now he's going a little bit better . no , i didn't care inaudible . it's true . no , it's true . hey look , he never had a chance . now , he's doing better . he's got probably a four or five percent chance . laughter crosstalk 
paul i've got a news flash . . . 
trump . . . i beat hillary clinton in many polls . the cue poll just came out . i beat hillary clinton in a recent fox poll , i beat hillary clinton in usa today , i beat her today in a poll in ohio . i beat i'm the only one that beats hillary clinton . i beat and i have not started on hillary yet . believe me , i will . . . cheering . . . start soon . i haven't even started . 
rubio alright . 
trump nice to be with you , megyn . 
bush thank you . 
rubio alright . . . so , that's the only part of the plan ? just the lines ? 
fiorina sorry , i can't hear you . 
trump no , no , no . laughter , applause , and cheering 
trump there is going to be competition among all of the states , and the insurance companies . they're going to have many , many different plans . 
rubio oh , ok . one million . 
trump . . . again . . . crosstalk 
paul well , i'm glad we're having a discussion about taxes because everybody laments that we lose jobs overseas , we have . our companies , and our jobs are being chased overseas by a 70 , 000 page tax code , so , that's why i've chosen to get rid of the whole thing , and have one single rate , 14 and a half percent for everybody , business , and for corporate income , and personal income . but , we also get rid of the payroll tax , so the working class would get a tax break as well . so , i think a flat tax , eliminating the tax code , getting rid of all the loopholes , is the way to go , and it's the way we get america going again . 
rubio look , this is a disturbing pattern now , because for a number of weeks now , ted cruz has just been telling lies . he lied about ben carson in iowa . he lies about planned parenthood . he lies about marriage . he's lying about all sorts of things . and now he makes things up . the bottom line is this is a campaign and people are watching it . and they see the truth behind all these issues . and here is the truth , ted cruz supported legalizing people that were in this country . . . 
cruz you know , the lines are very , very clear . marco right now supports citizenship for 12 million people here illegally . i oppose citizenship . marco stood on the debate stage and said that . but i would note not only that marco has a long record when it comes to amnesty . in the state of florida , as speaker of the house , he supported in state tuition for illegal immigrants . in addition to that , marco went on univision in spanish and said he would not rescind president obama's illegal executive amnesty on his first day in office . i have promised to rescind every single illegal executive action , including that one . applause and booing and on the question . . . crosstalk 
rubio let me tell you what this election is about for me . and i get all the delegate math and all that debate . let me tell you what's about for me . on tuesday night , i didn't do as well , obviously , as i wanted to . and i was a little bit disappointed when i got home . and my wife told me a story that night , which is the reason why i can get up the next day and keep fighting . there's a gentleman here in south florida who just got out of surgery . and his doctors told him he needs to be home resting . but every afternoon , he takes his little aluminum chair and he sits outside of an early polling center and holds a sign that says marco rubio . because for him , i symbolize all the sacrifices that his generation made so their children could have a better life than themselves that gentleman has not given up on me and i am not going to give up on him . i am going to work tirelessly every single day . . . . . . because this election is too important . what's at stake is the future of this country . and i believe i believe that at the end of this process this nation will make the right choice because i've always believed that god has blessed america , that god's hand is upon this country and that its greatest days are yet to come . 
trump the nice part of the plan you'll have many different plans . you'll have competition , you'll have so many different plans . 
rubio well , here we go . see , i'm not interested in being politically correct . i'm not interested in being politically correct . i'm interested in being correct . and in order to be correct on this issue , here's the bottom line . we do work . there is islam has a major problem on its hands . it has a significant percentage of its adherents , particular in the sunni faith but also in the shia , who have been radicalized . and are willing to fly planes into a building and kill innocent people . there is no doubt about that . it is also true if you look around the world at the challenges we face , we are going to have to work together with other with muslims , who do not who are not radicals . we're going to have to work with the jordanian kingdom . we're going to have to work with the saudis . we're going to have to work with the gulf kingdoms . we're going to have to work with the egyptians to defeat , for example , isis . bell rings it will take a sunni arab movement to defeat them . and so i think you can be correct without meaning to be politically correct . we are going to have to work with people of the muslim faith even as islam itself faces a serious crisis within it of radicalization . 
bush here we go . 
carson my name was mentioned . 
fiorina you know , i think mr . trump is a wonderful entertainer . he's been terrific at that business . i also think that one of the benefits of a presidential campaign is the character and capability , judgment and temperament of every single one of us is revealed over time and under pressure . all of us will be revealed over time and under pressure . i look forward to a long race . 
trump if i become president of the united states , one of the things that will be an absolute priority is number one , protection of israel , but also seeing if a deal can be made , the toughest deal , the toughest negotiation there probably is of any kind no matter where you look , no matter how hard you look . but i would like to give it a shot . very , very pro israel , nobody more pro israel . but i would love to give it a shot . and i have to tell you this , hugh . i have friend , israelis , non israelis , people from new york city that happen to be jewish and love israel , and some are very tough people , every single one of them , they know it's tough , but every single one of them wants to see if we could ever have peace in israel . and some believe it's possible . it may not be , in which case we'll find out . but it would be a priority if i become president to see what i could do . 
carson i believe in liberty and justice for all . i think everything that we do should be fair . and i've already described you know , how we can secure the border . we need to secure all the borders , because it's not just people coming in from south america and mexico , but there are terrorists who want to destroy us , who are getting across our borders fairly easily . and we have to stop that . but in terms of the people who are here already , after we after we stop the illegal immigration , we need to be reasonable . and i would give them a six month period in which to get registered as a guest worker , assuming that they have an acceptable record . they have to pay a back tax penalty , have to pay taxes going forward , but they don't have to live underground anymore . and i think they do not become american citizens , they do not vote . if they want to become an american citizen , they go through exactly the same process that anybody else goes through . i think that's the kind of situation that is actually fair to people . and we have other ways of of utilizing our facilities and our talents as foreign aid doing things in south america and central america and mexico that improve the economy there , so that they don't feel the need to come over here . that would cost us a lot less than borrowing money from china , paying interest on it . 
walker . . . jake , jake , jake , i just want to address that issue because you said i didn't answer , and i did . i said , to me , i think the real focus shouldn't be you know , hillary clinton talks about the minimum wage . that's her answer to grow the economy . the answer is to give people the skills and the education so they make far more than minimum wage . i don't want to argue about how low things are going to be , i want to talk about how do we lift everyone up in america . that's what reagan talked about . it wasn't how bad things were , it was how to make it better for everyone . that's what we've done in wisconsin , that's exactly what we'd do as . . . 
rubio well , let me say that legal immigration is not an issue i read about in the newspaper . immigration , illegal immigration , all the good aspects of immigration and all the negative ones as well , i live with . my family's immigrants . my neighbors are all immigrants . my in laws are all immigrants . so i've seen every aspect of it , and i can tell you america doesn't have one immigration problem , it has three . first , despite the fact that we are the most generous country in the history of the world in allowing people to come here legally , we have people still coming illegally . second , we have a legal immigration system that no longer works . it primary is built on the basis of whether you have a relative living here instead of merit . and third , we have 11 million or 12 million people , many of whom have been here for longer than a decade who are already here illegally . and we must deal with all three of these problems . we cannot deal with all three of these problems in one massive piece of legislation . i learned that . we tried it that way . here's the way forward first , we must we must secure our border , the physical border , with with a wall , absolutely . but we also need to have an entry exit tracking system . 40 percent of the people who come here illegally come legally , and then they overstay the visa . we also need a mandatory e verify system . after we've done that , step two would be to modernize our legal immigration system so you come to america on the basis of what you can contribute economically , not whether or not simply you have a relative living here . and after we've done those two things , i believe the american people . . . 
christie military action , maria , would be used when it was absolutely necessary to protect american lives and protect american interests around the world . we are not the world's policeman , but we need to stand up and be ready . and the problem , maria , is that the military is not ready , either . we need to rebuild our military , and this president has let it diminish to a point where tinpot dictators like the mullahs in iran are taking our navy ships . it is disgraceful , and in a christie administration , they would know much , much better than to do that . 
trump . . . no , a good deal maker will make great deals , but we'll do it the way our founders thought it should be done . people get together , they make deals . ronald reagan did it with tip o'neil very successfully , you didn't hear so much about executive orders , if you heard about it at all . you have to be able to get a consensus . now , the real person like it was mentioned about the deal with iran , how bad a deal is that ? it doesn't get any more amateurish than that . a good deal maker would never make a deal like that . with congress , you have to get everybody in a room , and you have to get them to agree . but , you have to get them to agree what you want , and that's part of being a deal maker . you can't leave the white house , go to hawaii and play golf for three weeks and be a real deal maker . it doesn't work that way . you have to get people in , grab them , hug them , kiss them , and get the deal done . but , it's got to be the deal that you want . 
cruz and and by the way , let's be clear . donald claims donald claims to care about . . . 
kasich look , we have a great president here , george bush , the 41st president of the united states . he worked with ronald reagan to pass an effort to try to solve this problem a path to legalization . you see , that was a time when things worked . it was a time when president reagan and george bush decided that we needed to make the country work . look , i think there is an answer here . the answer is you complete the border . you let people know that once it's done , you don't have a right to come in . if you come in , we don't want any excuse . you're going to go back . but i favor a guest worker program . i think it's practical . and i think for the 11 million or 11 . 5 million americans the illegals that are here , if they have not committed a crime since they've been here , i'd make them pay a fine , some back taxes , maybe some community service . and at the end , i'd give them a path to legalization , but not a path to citizenship . i don't think we're going to tear families apart . i don't think we're going to ride around in people's neighborhoods and grab people out of their homes . i don't think first of all , i don't think it's practical and i don't think it reflects america . you know what happened ? the problem with president reagan is we didn't get in there and actually finish the border . and i think it was probably business interests that affected it . but at the end of the day , let's be practical . let's start solving problems in this country instead of kicking them upstairs . with president reagan and george bush , it was a bipartisan coalition to address the issue , and i think we can and should do it again . and i will have a plan in the first 100 days to get it done and get this issue behind us . 
fiorina we've mismanaged going into iraq . 
rubio no , no , give him time . 
rubio and i used it to pay off my loans . and it's available on paperback , if you're interested in buying my book . 
rubio i want to take off from that point and argue the same thing . and that is that one of the things you're watching tonight are 11 quality candidates debating an important issue . the republican party is blessed to have 11 good candidates , inaudible 10 good candidates . the democrats can't even come up with one . and on this issue of the medicare in particular , it's important because they're going to demagogue what we're saying here tonight . everyone up here tonight that's talking about reforms , i think and i know for myself i speak to this , we're all talking about reforms for future generations . nothing has to change for current beneficiaries . my mother is on medicare and social security . i'm against anything that's bad for my mother . laughter so , we're talking about we're talking about reform for people like me and people like senator cruz , as he talked about earlier , who are years away from retirement that have a way to plan for these changes , and way that's very reasonable . and it's not too much to ask of our generation after everything our parents and our grandparents did for us . 
trump you have tremendous waste , fraud and abuse . that we're taking care of . that we're taking care of . it's tremendous . we have in social security right now thousands and thousands of people that are over 106 years old . now , you know they don't exist . they don't exist . there's tremendous waste , fraud and abuse , and we're going to get it . but we're not going to hurt the people who have been paying into social security their whole life and then all of a sudden they're supposed to get less . we're bringing our jobs back . we're going to make our economy great again . 
cruz you would carpet bomb where isis is , not a city , but the location of the troops . you use air power directed and you have embedded special forces to direction the air power . but the object isn't to level a city . the object is to kill the isis terrorists . to make it listen , isis is gaining strength because the perception is that they're winning . and president obama fuels that perception . that will change when militants across the globe see that when you join isis that you are giving up your life , you are signing your death warrant , and we need a president who is focused on defeating every single isis terrorist and protecting the homeland , which should be the first priority . 
trump only rosie o'donnell . laughter 
paul gerard , can i comment . . . crosstalk 
bush well , first of all , he , as i said , supported john roberts . he supported him , publicly . so , you can rewrite history , i guess , ted , but the simple fact is that you supported him because he had all the criteria that you would have thought would have made a great justice . and , i think he is doing a good job . but , the simple fact is that going forward , what we need to do is to have someone that has a long standing set of rulings that consistently makes it clear that he is a focused , exclusively on upholding the constitution of the united states so they won't try to use the bench as a means to which legislate . 
trump real a public use ? 
trump well , they do . and , you know , they sue . everybody sues , right ? they see excessive i mean , they go out , they sue . we have so much litigation i see the courts , i see what they're doing . they sue , and you know what ? we don't want excessive force . but at what point you know , either you're going to have a police force that can do its job . . . i was just up in manchester , i met with the police officers yesterday . tremendous people . they love the area , they love the people , they love all the people . they want to do their job . and you're going to have abuse and you're going to have problems , and you've got to solve the problems and you have to weed out the problems . but the police in this country are absolutely amazing people . 
huckabee at the end of my presidency i would like to believe that the world would be a safe place , and there wouldn't be the threats . not only to the u . s . , but to israel and our allies , because we would have the most incredible well trained , well equipped , well prepared military in the history of mankind . and they would know that the commander in chief would never send them to a mission without all the resources necessary , but people wouldn't bully us anymore . because they would know that that would be an invitation to their destruction . domestically , we would be operating under a tax system that eliminated the irs . people wouldn't be punished for their work , and for what they produced . and life would be really deemed precious . abortion would be no more . it would be as much of a scourge in our past as slavery is . and we would have a peaceful country , where people respected each other and people respected law enforcement . and we would focus on cures . and we would make this country not only safe from our enemies without , but safe from the enemies within . and it would be a good place to raise our kids and our grandkids . 
cruz well , neil , i'm glad we're focusing on the important topics of the evening . laughter and applause you know , back in september , my friend donald said that he had had his lawyers look at this from every which way , and there was no issue there . there was nothing to this birther issue . laughter now , since september , the constitution hasn't changed . laughter but the poll numbers have . and i recognize i recognize that donald is dismayed that his poll numbers are falling in iowa . but the facts and the law here are really quite clear . under longstanding u . s . law , the child of a u . s . citizen born abroad is a natural born citizen . if a soldier has a child abroad , that child is a natural born citizen . that's why john mccain , even though he was born in panama , was eligible to run for president . if an american missionary has a child abroad , that child is a natural born citizen . that's why george romney , mitt's dad , was eligible to run for president , even though he was born in mexico . at the end of the day , the legal issue is quite straightforward , but i would note that the birther theories that donald has been relying on some of the more extreme ones insist that you must not only be born on u . s . soil , but have two parents born on u . s . soil . under that theory , not only would i be disqualified , marco rubio would be disqualified , bobby jindal would be disqualified and , interestingly enough , donald j . trump would be disqualified . 
trump i know i'm here for the ratings , but it's a little bit ridiculous . laughter 
trump . . . believe me the world is peanuts by comparison . 
bush oh , i'll talk about that , too . but you haven't asked me a question in a while , neil , so i thought i'd get that off my chest if you don't mind . laughter 
carson well , i would suggest a fair tax system , and that's what we have proposed . a flat tax for everybody no exemptions , no deductions , no shelters , because some people have a better capability of taking advantage of those than others . you know , and then the other thing we have to do is stop spending so much money . you know , i my my mother taught me this . you know , she only had a third grade education , but you know , she knew how to stretch a dollar . i mean , she would drive a car until it wouldn't make a sound , and then gather up all her coins and buy a new car . in fact , if my mother were secretary of treasury , we would not be in a deficit situation . but . . . laughter . . . you know , the the the fact of the matter is you know , if we fix the taxation system , make it absolutely fair , and get rid of the incredible regulations because every regulation is a tax , it's a on goods and services . and it's the most regressive tax there is . you know , when you go into the store and buy a box of laundry detergent , and the price has up you know , 50 cents because of regulations , a poor person notices that . a rich person does not . middle class may notice it when they get to the cash register . and everything is costing more money , and we are killing our our our people like this . and bernie sanders and hillary clinton will say it's those evil rich people . it's not the evil rich people . it's the evil government that is that is putting all these regulations on us so that we can't survive . 
rubio well , and today , we have a left wing government under this president that is undermining all of the institutions and society that support the family and teach those values . 
trump well , in wisconsin . . . 
paul say again ? 
cruz maria , i assume that i can respond to that . 
cruz he campaigned promising to lead the fight against amnesty . 
carson well , first of all the the plan gives people the option of of opting out . but i think they will see a very good option here . you know , the annual medicare budget is over 600 billion . and there are 48 million people involved 40 million , 65 and over , and 8 million other . divide that out . that comes out to 12 , 500 for each one . now , i can tell you there are a lot of private sector things that you could do with 12 , 500 , which will get you a lot more than you get from this government program . and that's really a theme of a lot of the things that i'm talking about . how do we utilize our intellect rather than allowing the government to use its , quote , intellect , in order to help us to be able to live healthier and better lives ? it was never intended that the government should be in every aspect of our lives . this is a country that is of , for and by the people . 
rubio well , first of all , this is an issue that's been debated now for 30 years . and for 30 years , the issue of immigration has been about someone who's in this country , maybe they're here illegally , but they're looking for a job . this issue is not about that anymore . first and foremost , this issue has to be now more than anything else about keeping america safe . and here's why . there is a radical jihadist group that is manipulating our immigration system . and not just green cards . they're looking they're recruiting people that enter this country as doctors and engineers and even fiances . they understand the vulnerabilities we have on the southern border . they're looking they're looking to manipulate our the visa waiver countries to get people into the united states . so our number one priority must now become ensuring that isis cannot get killers into the united states . so whether it's green cards or any other form of entry into america , when i'm president if we do not know who you are or why you are coming , you are not going to get into the united states of america . 
cruz but you gave him a check and called for him to be impeached . 
bush you've already made two comments , john . it's my turn . 
bush my name was mentioned twice . 
rubio . . . is so relevant here . i saw this video last week where he's sitting in front of a camera saying we're going to hire the best people , and i'm going to hand pick them . there are going to be hand picked and instructors , the best instructors in the world . one of them , but the way , was the manager at a buffalo wild wing . and , that's who they hired to do this , and people borrowed money , and they signed up for this fake university . and , these people owe all this money now , and they got nothing in return for it , but you are willing to say whatever you had to say . . . bell ringing . . . to get them to give you their money . . . 
rubio . . . you wrote a story on it , and you had to go back and correct it . 
cruz fifty nine years ago , florida welcomed my father to america as he stepped off the ferry boat from cuba onto key west . he was 18 . he was filled with hopes and dreams , and yet he was in the freest land on the face of the earth . this election , this debate is not about insults . it's not about attacks . it's not about any of the individuals on this stage . this election is about you and your children . it's about the freedom america has always had and making sure that that freedom is there for the next generation , that we stop washington from standing in the way of the hard working taxpayers of america . 
bush here's apart from the apart from the higher prices on consumers and people are living paycheck to paycheck , apart from that , there will be retaliation . 
trump fine . 
trump no , the new planes . i'm not talking about now , i'm talking about in the future they're building massive plants in china because china does not want boeing building their planes here , they want them built in china , because china happens to be smart the way they do it , not the way we do it . 
rubio he's talked through the whole thing . 
christie hi , my name is chris christie , and i'd like to you take the camera off me and put it on the audience because i'd like to ask all of you , how many of you , raise your hand , believe that in today's barak obama america your children will have a better life than you've had ? you see ? that's why i'm running for president . because leadership is not about me , it's about our country . and , what we talk about tonight , it's not about us , it's about the people in the audience tonight , because in seven short years this president has stripped away their trust , and their faith , and their belief that the next generation will have a better life . he's stolen that from us , and when i'm president , i'm going to take it back . 
christie maria , i'd like to interrupt this on the floor of the senate to actually answer the question you asked , which was on entitlements . do you remember that , everybody ? this was a question on entitlements . and the reason and the reason . . . crosstalk . . . no , you already had your chance , marco , and you blew it . here's the thing . crosstalk the fact is , the reason why . . . 
cruz . . . 10 flat rate . . . 
cruz . . . is because he's afraid that he will get hit . 
trump i'm being audited 12 years in a row , at least . now , until that audit's done , and i don't think anybody would blame me , i'm not giving it . . . crosstalk 
bush here's the record . here's the record . we led the nation in job growth seven out of eight years . when i left there was 9 billion of reserves , 35 percent of general revenue . no state came close to that . 
bush we need someone with a proven record to be able to forge consensus to solve problems . and right now , both republicans and democrats in washington don't get it . people are struggling 63 percent of americans can't make a 500 car payment . most americans are living paycheck to paycheck . and we need someone has a proven record of growing the economy , reforming the things that are broken . and i'm that person . 
cruz well , hugh , i agree with you that it justice scalia's passing underscores the enormous gravity of this election . justice scalia was someone i knew personally for 20 years ; was privileged to be at his funeral this weekend . and with his passing , the court is now hanging in the balance . we are one liberal justice away from a five justice radical leftist majority that would undermine our religious liberty ; that would undermine the right to life ; and that would fundamentally erase the second amendment right to keep and bear arms from the constitution . now , i think the voters of texas , the voters across super tuesday are assessing everyone standing on this this stage . in the past , republican presidents always promise to nominate strict constitutionalists . so i'm certain if you took a survey , everyone would say they would do that . but the reality is , democrats bat about 1 , 000 . just about everyone they put on the court votes exactly as they want . republicans have batted worse than 500 , more than half of the people we put on the court have been a disaster . i've spent my whole life fighting to defend the bill of rights and the constitution . i can tell you , for voters that care about life or marriage or religious liberty or the second amendment , they're asking the question who do you know , beyond a shadow of a doubt , who do you know will nominate principled constitutionalists to the court ? i give you my word , every justice i nominate will vigorously defend the bill of rights for my children and for yours . 
paul i think that by arming the allies of isis , the islamic rebels against assad , that we created a safe space or made that space bigger for isis to grow . i think those who have wanted regime change have made a mistake . when we toppled gadhafi in libya , i think that was a mistake . i think isis grew stronger , we had a failed state , and we were more at risk . i'd like to also go back to , though , another question , which is , is donald trump a serious candidate ? the reason i ask this is , if you're going to close the internet , realize , america , what that entails . that entails getting rid of the first amendment , ok ? it's no small feat . if you are going to kill the families of terrorists , realize that there's something called the geneva convention we're going to have to pull out of . it would defy every norm that is america . so when you ask yourself , whoever you are , that think you're going to support donald trump , think , do you believe in the constitution ? are you going to change the constitution ? 
rubio well no , i understand . and not but but i think it's important to note that it is and senator cruz , i think , was alluding to this , as well it is the standard procedure of the united states , if those missiles pose a threat to land , civilians , our allies or any of our assets , to shoot down that missile in mid flight . i understand your question was about a preemptive strike , but my point is that there is in place now contingencies to avoid any sort of that strike from going errant and destroying any any assets of the united states , or implicating or hurting any of our allies or any of our assets in the region . 
rubio . . . of all the people on this stage , he performs the worst against hillary clinton . 
bush here's the deal . no , i did not oppose when the legislature passed the bill to deal with that very issue . that's the way to solve this problem . medical marijuana on the ballot was opened up , there was a huge loophole , it was the first step to getting to a inaudible place . and as a citizen of florida , i voted no . 
bush and why don't you apologize to her right now . 
cruz jake , let me be clear what donald just said . he said that that 45 percent tax is a threat . and mind you , you are paying the tax . it's not china that pays the tax . it's you , the working men and women . so ask yourself at home how is this helping you ? if your wages have been stagnant for 20 years ; if you can't pay the bills , how does it help you to have a president come and say , i'm going to jack i'm going to put a 45 percent tax on diapers when you buy diapers , on automobiles when you buy automobiles , on clothing when you buy clothing . that hurts you . it's why we've got to get beyond rhetoric of china bad , and actually get to how do you solve the problem . because this solution would hurt jobs and hurt hard working taxpayers in america . 
trump thank you . nobody knows politicians better than i do . they're all talk , they're no action , nothing gets done . i've watched it for years . take a look at what's happening to our country . all of the things that i've been talking about , whether it's trade , whether it's building up our depleted military , whether it's taking care of our vets , whether it's getting rid of common core , which is a disaster , or knocking out obamacare and coming up with something so much better , i will get it done . politicians will never , ever get it done . and we will make america great again . thank you . 
trump i think it will haunt him . i think it's a terrible . i think it's going to haunt him absolutely . he came back later and he said he misspoke . there was no question because i heard when he said the statement . i was watching and he said the statement . and i said , wow , i can't believe it . i will take care of women . i respect women . i will take care of women . one thing we will say and i would like to get back to the iran situation . we're talking about iran . the agreement was terrible . it was incompetent . i've never seen anything like it . one of the worst contracts of any kind i've ever seen . and nobody ever mentions north korea where you have this maniac sitting there and he actually has nuclear weapons and somebody better start thinking about north korea and perhaps a couple of other places . but certainly north korea . and ted and i have spoken . we've a lot of us have spoken . we're talking about iran . they are bad actors , bad things are going to happen . but in the meantime , you have somebody right now in north korea who has got nuclear weapons and who is saying almost every other week , i'm ready to use them . and we don't even mention it . 
rubio let me tell you i will tell you we have zero responsibility , because let's remember what the president said . he said the attack he would conduct would be a pinprick . well , the united states military was not build to conduct pinprick attacks . if the united states military is going to be engaged by a commander in chief , it should only be engaged in an endeavor to win . and we're not going to authorize use of force if you're not put in a position where they can win . and quite frankly , people don't trust this president as commander in chief because of that . 
bush six million more people are living in poverty than the day that barack obama got elected president . six million more people . the middle class has had declining income , workforce participation rates are lower than they were in 1977 . for the first time in modern history , more businesses are failing than are being created . that is what the next president will have to deal with . and i believe we can reverse course by creating a strategy of high sustained economic growth , not the new normal of 2 percent that all the left says we just have to get used to , but a 4 percent growth strategy where we reform how we tax , fix the broken regulatory system , embrace the energy revolution in our midst , fix the immigration system so we can turn it into an economic driver , deal with the structural fiscal problems that exist because of our entitlement problems that will overwhelm and create way too much debt . if we grow at 4 percent , people are going to be lifted out of poverty . the great middle that defines our country will have a chance to be able to pursue their dreams as they see fit . that should be the great challenge and the great opportunity for the next president of the united states , to forge consensus to go back to a high growth strategy . and then we'll be able to lead the world . without a high growth strategy , our country will never have the resources or the optimism to be able to lead the world , which the world desperately needs our leadership . 
trump i think and i think you're going to have i think you're going to see a big impact on autism . 
trump . . . i beat hillary clinton . i beat hillary clinton in many polls . . . 
rubio in the middle of negotiating this treaty , khamenei led the assembled masses in chanting , death to america . i'm reminded of a great editorial cartoon . it shows the ayatollah khamenei saying , death to all americans , and then it shows john kerry coming back , saying , can we meet ya half way ? laughter we need a commander in chief who will stand up and protect this country . and i'll tell you , i can't wait to stand on that debate stage with hillary clinton and to make abundantly clear if you vote for hillary , you are voting for the ayatollah khomeini to possess a nuclear weapon and if you elect me as president , under no circumstances will a theocratic ayatollah who chants death to america ever be allowed to acquire a nuclear weapon . crosstalk 
trump i gave many people their money back . 
fiorina this is about changing the system . 
trump that's not keeping us safe . 
paul use the fourth amendment ! 
rubio to begin with , moammar gadhafi and the revolt against gadhafi was not started by the united states . it was started by the libyan people . and the reason why i argued we needed to get involved is because he was going to go one way or the other . and my argument then was proven true , and that is , the longer that civil war took , the more militias would be formed and the more unstable the country would be after the fact . as far as moammar gadhafi is concerned , by the way , moammar gadhafi is the man that killed those americans over lockerbie , scotland . moammar gadhafi is also the man that bombed that cafe in berlin and killed those marines . and you want to know why moammar gadhafi started cooperating on his nuclear program ? because we got rid of saddam hussein . and so he got scared that he would be next , and that's why he started cooperating . look , we will have to work around the world with less than ideal governments . the government in saudi arabia is not a democracy , but we will have to work with them . the government in jordan is not perfect , but we will have to work with them . but anti american dictators like assad , who help hezbollah , who helped get those ieds into iraq , if they go , i will not shed a tear . 
fiorina jake ? 
trump by the way , that's the other thing . . . 
christie well , i think we have to focus , hugh , on exactly what the priorities are . and to me , what i've always said is that the president has set up an awful situation through his deal with iran , because what his deal with iran has done is empower them and enrich them . and that's the way isis has been created and formed here . isis is created and formed because of the abuse that assad and his iranian sponsors have rained down on the sunnis in syria . and so when we empower iran , this is why this president and when hillary clinton says her theory against isis will be just about the same as the president , then get ready for more unrest and more murder and more violence in the middle east . we need to focus our attention on iran , because if you miss iran , you are not going to get isis . the two are inextricably connected because one causes the other . 
bush . . . we've had a 10 reduction in carbon emissions , and it isn't because of solyndra . it isn't because of the central planners in washington d . c . it's because we've had a great american success story , the explosion of natural gas . taking two existing technologies , and applying it through innovation has created lower carbon emissions , lower energy costs 40 of all the economic activity in the age of obama has come from the energy sector , and hillary clinton wants to suppress that . we i think we ought to be expanding this . high growth is the path to lower carbon , and more jobs . i know for a fact , as governor of the state of florida , we created the largest land purchasing programs , and environment clean up programs because we had a growing economy . our revenues were growing at 4 . 4 . it allowed for resources to be able to protect the natural system . we got to get to a conservation . . . bell ringing . . . in environmental policy that goes beyond just carbon . . . 
bush check it out . laughter 
walker jake , yeah , absolutely , i'll take this on , because this is an issue that's important in this race . just because he says it doesn't make it true . the facts are the facts . we balanced a 3 . 6 billion budget deficit , we did it by cutting taxes 4 . 7 billion to help working families , family farmers , small business owners and senior citizens . and it's about time people in america stand up and take note of this . if you want someone that can actually take on the special interest of washington , which you yourself said you were part of , using the system , we need somebody that will stand up and fight for average americans to put them back in charge of their government . i'm the one who is taking that on . i'll do that as your next president . 
paul i think one of the great problems , and what american people don't like about politics , is hypocrisy . people have one standard for others and not for them for themselves . there is at least one prominent example on the stage of someone who says they smoked pot in high school , and yet the people going to to jail for this are poor people , often african americans and often hispanics , and yet the rich kids who use drugs aren't . i personally think that this is a crime for which the only victim is the individual , and i think that america has to take a different attitude . i would like to see more rehabilitation and less incarceration . i'm a fan of the drug courts which try to direct you back towards work and less time in jail . but the bottom line is the states . we say we like the 10th amendment , until we start talking about this . and i think the federal government has gone too far , i think that the war on drugs has had a racial outcome , and really has been something that has really damaged our inner cities . not only do the drugs damage them , we damage them again by incarcerating them and then preventing them from getting employment over time . so i don't think that the federal government should override the states . i believe in the 10th amendment and i really will say that the states are left to themselves . 
trump i would put it in a blind trust . well , i don't know if it's a blind trust if ivanka , don and eric run it . if that's a blind trust , i don't know . but i would probably have my children run it with my executives and i wouldn't ever be involved because i wouldn't care about anything but our country , anything . 
trump i am doing business transactions . i will know more about this and , as you said , that was very acceptable , and when you listen to that whole interview , it's a great interview , you said it , i didn't . well , now i did . but . . . crosstalk 
cruz but you cannot , in fact , care about conservative supreme court justices and support jimmy carter for president . you cannot care about conservative supreme court justices and support john kerry for president , as donald did . you cannot care about conservative supreme court justices and support harry reid for senate majority leader . and you cannot care about conservative supreme court justices and write four checks to hillary clinton for her to be president if you care at all about the second amendment or religious liberty or anything else . 
fiorina jake jake . . . 
trump by the way . . . 
trump that doesn't mean i was endorsing that . i was not endorsing it . i said that is a strong , powerful government that put it down with strength . and then they kept down the riot . it was a horrible thing . it doesn't mean at all i was endorsing it . as far as putin is concerned , i think putin has been a very strong leader for russia . i think he has been a lot stronger than our leader , that i can tell you . i mean , for russia , that doesn't mean i'm endorsing putin . 
trump . . . that we don't even know who they are . 
bush you've got , according to your to what you said on one of the talk shows , you got hillary clinton to go to your wedding 
cruz . . . fight every day to defend the bill of rights . 
huckabee . . . this is a matter not of math , this is a matter of morality . if this country that does not keep its promise to seniors then what promise can this country hope to be trusted to keep ? and , the fact is , none of them . crosstalk 
fiorina . . . bombs and materiel . we have not supplied it . . . 
huckabee i'd go with duck hunter . 
cruz yes or no . just answer the question . 
cruz you know , this is another issue on which donald and i have sharp disagreements . on planned parenthood , he thinks planned parenthood is wonderful . i would instruct the department of justice to investigate them and prosecute any and all criminal violations . on obamacare , both donald and i say we want to end it , but for very different reasons . i want to end it because it goes too far , it's killed millions of jobs , and it's hurting people's health care . donald wants to end it because he says it doesn't go nearly far enough . and what was amazing in that exchange that was missing is for decades donald has been advocating socialized medicine . what he's said is government should pay for everyone's health care , and in fact , a couple of debates ago , he said , if you don't support socialized health care , you're heartless . now , liberal democrats have been saying that for years . now let me tell you if you're a small business owner , donald trump's socialized medicine , putting the government in charge of your health care would kill more jobs than obamacare , and if you're elderly , the results of socialized medicine in every country on earth where it's been implemented has been rationing , has been the government saying , no , you don't get that hip replacement , you don't get that knee replacement , the government is in charge of your health care . i'll tell you this . as president . . . 
trump i would build consensus with congress , and congress would agree with me . i'll give you an example , because i don't like the idea of using executive orders like our president . it is a disaster what he's doing . i would build consensus , but consensus means you have to work hard . you have to cajole . you have to get them into the oval office and get them all together , and you have to make deals . let me just tell you , i mentioned before , china big chinese company bought the chicago exchange . kerry is moving and if you saw the people , because they have a video of the announcement that carrier is moving to mexico , o . k . ? well , i'll tell you what . i would go right now to carrier and i would say i am going to work awfully hard . you're going to make air conditioners now in mexico . you're going to get all of these 1 , 400 people that are being laid off they're laid off . they were crying . they were it was a very sad situation . you're going to go to mexico . you're going to make air conditioners in mexico , you're going to put them across our border with no tax . i'm going to tell them right now , i am going to get consensus from congress and we're going to tax you when those air conditioners come . so stay where you are or build in the united states , because we are killing ourselves with trade pacts that are no good for us and no good for our workers . 
rubio as few as possible . the second amendment , as i've said before , is not a suggestion . it is the constitutional right of every american to protect themselves and their families . it is a right that it is the second amendment for a reason . it is right after the defense of the freedom of speech for a reason , for clearly the founders of our nation understood and the framers of the constitution understood that you cannot have life and you cannot have liberty and cannot pursue happiness if you are not safe . 
trump we've made a terrible mistake getting involved there in the first place . that thing will collapse about two seconds after they leave . just as i said that iraq was going to collapse after we leave . 
trump . . . i never called him i don't call him . . 
cruz you see , you and i . . . 
walker well , i'm pro life , i've always been pro life , and i've got a position that i think is consistent with many americans out there in that . . . . . . in that i believe that that is an unborn child that's in need of protection out there , and i've said many a time that that unborn child can be protected , and there are many other alternatives that can also protect the life of that mother . that's been consistently proven . unlike hillary clinton , who has a radical position in terms of support for planned parenthood , i defunded planned parenthood more than four years ago , long before any of these videos came out . . . . . . i've got a position that's in line with everyday america . 
trump so . . . 
bush martha and david . . . 
trump correct . 
trump yeah , i know it is . but it's not what you said in the op ed . 
huckabee ronald reagan said trust , but verify . president obama is trust , but vilify . he trusts our enemies and vilifies everyone who disagrees with him . and the reason we disagree with him has nothing to do with party . crosstalk 
rubio thank you wolf . it's really amazing to be back in las vegas . i spent six years as a child growing not far from where we stand tonight . i use to sit on the porch of our home and listen to my grandfather tell stories as he smoked one of three daily cigars . one of the things my grandfather instilled in me , was that i was really blessed because i was a citizen of the greatest country in the history of our mankind . but there have always been people in american politics that wanted america to be more like the rest of the world . and in 2008 , one of them was elected president of this country and the result has been a disaster . today you have millions of americans that feel left out and out of place in their own country , struggling to live paycheck to paycheck , called bigots because they hold on to traditional values . and around the world , america's influence has declined while this president has destroyed our military , our allies no longer trust us , and our adversaries no longer respect us . and that is why this election is so important . that is why i'm running for president . and that's why i'm going to ask you for your vote tonight . if you elect me president , we will have a president that believes america is the greatest country in the world and we will have a president that acts like it . 
cruz jake , jake . . . 
rubio this is why , because he's trying to do to the american voter what he did to the people that signed up for this course . he's making promises he has no intention of keeping . and it won't just be 36 , 000 that they lose , it's our country that's at stake here . the future of the united states and the most important election in a generation , and he's trying to con people into giving them their vote just like he conned these people into giving him their money . 
rubio well , let me begin by answering both the first question and this one , because they're related . as i've said many times before , my parents were never rich people . my father was a bartender . my mother was a maid . they worked for a living . but they were successful people , because , despite the fact that they weren't well educated and had those jobs , they made enough money to buy a home in a safe and stable neighborhood , retire with dignity , leave all four of their children better off than themselves . we call that the american dream , but in fact , it's a universal dream of a better life that people have all over the world . it is a reminder that every country in the world has rich people . what makes america special is that we have millions and millions of people that are not rich , that through hard work and perseverance are able to be successful . the problem is that today people are not successful working as hard as ever because the economy is not providing jobs that pay enough . if i thought that raising the minimum wage was the best way to help people increase their pay , i would be all for it , but it isn't . in the 20th century , it's a disaster . if you raise the minimum wage , you're going to make people more expensive than a machine . and that means all this automation that's replacing jobs and people right now is only going to be accelerated . here's the best way to raise wages . make america the best place in the world to start a business or expand an existing business , tax reform and regulatory reform , bring our debt under control , fully utilize our energy resources so we can reinvigorate manufacturing , repeal and replace obamacare , and make higher education faster and easier to access , especially vocational training . for the life of me , i don't know why we have stigmatized vocational education . welders make more money than philosophers . we need more welders and less philosophers . if we do that and if we do this if we do this , we will be able to increase wages for millions of americans and we will be able to leave everyone better off without making anyone worse off . 
trump i don't believe these politicians . all talk , no action . i'm standing here listening to i'm hearing him say about a percentage . cnn , he gets 15 . that means 85 percent , based on what you're saying , of the people don't dig you , number one , number one . is that a correct statement ? how do you get are you at 15 in the new cnn poll ? do you believe in cnn ? i mean , i know we're with fox . but cnn spent 
trump one , one of the victims . 
carson it's the same question ? 
paul good evening , everyone . i'm an eye surgeon from bowling green , kentucky . my wife , kelly , and i have been married for nearly 25 years , and i spend my days defending the constitution and the bill of rights . i think there's nothing more important than understanding that the constitution restrains government , not the people . thank you . 
rubio ours the story of america is an extraordinary story . it is the story of a nation that for over two centuries each generation has left the next better off than themselves . but now , because washington is out of touch , for the fault of both political parties , for the first time in our history , that is in doubt . and that is what this election must be about , because if the next four years are anything like the last eight years , our children will be the first americans ever left worse off by their parents . this election is about making a different choice , about applying our principles of limited government and free enterprise to the unique issues of our time . and if we do , we will not just save the american dream . we will expand it to reach more people and change more lives than ever before . and the 21st century can be a new american century . so tonight , i ask you for your vote and i ask you to join us at my website , marcorubio . com . laughter and applause 
carson for many months , the political class , pundits , the media , have tried to ignore or bury me . they say that politics is too complex , and too sleazy . you can't survive . well , guess what ? i'm still here , and i'm not going any place either . and , i believe there is still a place in our country for faith , integrity , and common sense . hundreds of thousands of you drafted me to run for president . . . bell rings . . . and , i am going to with the help of god , and you , once again place the american people at the pinnacle with the government there to serve it . 
cruz well , you know , marco has continued these attacks , and he knows they're not true . yes , it is true that i voted against the national defense authorization act , because when i campaigned in texas i told voters in texas that i would oppose the federal government having the authority to detain u . s . citizens permanently with no due process . i have repeatedly supported an effort to take that out of that bill , and i honored that campaign commitment . 
trump but i have to say . . . 
fiorina imagine a clinton presidency . our military will continue to deteriorate . our veterans will not be cared for . and , no , mrs . clinton , that situation is not exaggerated . the rich will get richer . the poor will get poorer . the middle class will continue to get crushed . and as bad as that picture is , what's even worse is that a clinton presidency will corrode the character of this nation . why ? because of the clinton way say whatever you have to , lie as long as you can get away with it . we must beat hillary clinton . carly fiorina can beat hillary clinton . i will beat hillary clinton . and under a president fiorina , we will restore the character of this nation , the security of this nation , the prosperity of this nation , because as citizens , we will take our government back . 
christie hold on one second . 
walker you're using the talking . . . 
trump you're going to see , you're going to see . 
trump i really am . i'll be honest , i really am . i mean , the people have been putting me . . . i really am . 
cruz but what would you say . . . 
fiorina . . . i will . we could arm the kurds . they've been asking us for three years . all of this is within our control . 
huckabee . . . chris . . . 
cruz donald , you can get back on your meds now . 
rubio . . . the other thing i'd like to make about our plan , one more point , it is the most pro growth tax plan that i can imagine because it doesn't tax investments at all . you know why ? because the more you tax something , the less of it you get . i want to be in i want america to be the best . . . 
cruz thanks for coming back to me , maria . both donald and jeb have good points , and there is a middle ground . donald is right that china is running over president obama like he is a child , president obama is not protecting american workers and we are getting hammered . you know , i sat down with the senior leadership of john deere . they discussed how how hard it is to sell tractors in china , because all the regulatory barriers . they're protectionist . but jeb is also right that , if we just impose a tariff , they'll put reciprocal tariffs , which will hurt iowa farmers and south carolina producers and 20 percent of the american jobs that depend on exports . so the way you do it is you pass a tax plan like the tax plan i've introduced a simple flat tax , 10 percent for individuals , and a 16 percent business flat tax , you abolish the irs . . . . . . and here's the critical point , maria the business flat tax enables us to abolish the corporate income tax , the death tax , the obamacare taxes , the payroll taxes , and they're border adjustable , so every export pays no taxes whatsoever . it's tax free a huge advantage for our farmers and ranchers and manufacturers and every import pays the 16 percent business flat tax . it's like a tariff , but here's the difference if we impose a tariff , china responds . the business flat tax , they already impose their taxes on us , so there's no reciprocal . . . bell rings . . . tariffs that come against us . it puts us on a level , even playing field , which brings jobs here at home . . . 
bush i don't want to put poor people in jail , randy . 
trump not very flexible . no , not very flexible . i give the example i'm going to build a wall . i'm the one that wants the wall . i'm the one that can build the wall . it's going to get built . and by the way , mexico is going to pay for the wall . i can tell you that . mexico is going to pay for the wall . but and i used an example . and this isn't necessarily what was said , but whatever was said , the wall's 50 feet high . is it going to be 45 feet or 40 feet ? that could very well be . that could very well he wants it to be higher . laughter that could very well be . but there's always give and take . there's always negotiation . and the best negotiator that knows what he's doing will make a great deal . but we need give and take in government . if you don't have give and take , you're never going to agree on anything . 
rubio because it is not true that i'm not going to get rid of daca . i am going to get rid of daca . in the spanish interview , you just read out the transcript in spanish , i said , it will have to end at some point . that point will be when i eliminate the executive order and the people who have those permits when they expire will not be allowed to renew it . and new people will not be able to apply . in fact , i don't even think we should be taking new enrollees in the program now . that is how the program ends and how you wind it down is you allow the people who are on it , when the program expires , they cannot renew it , and it goes away . but i will cancel the executive order as soon as i take as soon as i step foot into the oval office . 
huckabee . . . thank you . 
trump . . . i will know more about the problems of this world by the time i sit , and you look at what's going in this world right now by people that supposedly know , this world is a mess . 
kasich it sounds more and more what my daughter said that i said in the beginning , all the fighting and arguing is not advancing us . 
trump you defrauded the people of florida , little marco . 
fiorina but i also think that these are very serious times ; 75 percent of the american people think the federal government is corrupt . i agree with them . and this big powerful , corrupt bureaucracy works now only for the big , the powerful , the wealthy and the well connected . meantime , wages have stagnated for 40 years . we have more americans out of work or just americans who quit looking for work for 40 years . ours was intended to be a citizen government . this is about more than replacing a d with an r . we need a leader who will help us take our government back . 
trump no , no . you're the liar . you're the lying guy up here . crosstalk 
trump you pushed him . 
trump . . . that they come into our country as an act of love . with all of the problems we that we have , in so many instances we have wonderful people coming in . but with all of the problems this is not an act of love . he's weak on immigration by the way , in favor of common core , which is also a disaster , but weak on immigration . he doesn't get my vote . 
trump we've lost anywhere between four and seven million jobs because of china . what i said then was , we have very unfair trade with china . we're going to have a trade deficit of 505 billion dollars this year with china . a lot of that is because they devalue their currency . what i said to the new york times , is that , we have great power , economic power over china and if we wanted to use that and the amount where the 45 percent comes in , that would be the amount they saw their devaluations that we should get . that we should get . what i'm saying is this , i'm saying that we do it but if they don't start treating us fairly and stop devaluing and let their currency rise so that our companies can compete and we don't lose all of these millions of jobs that we're losing , i would certainly start taxing goods that come in from china . who the hell has to lose 505 billion dollars a year ? 
kasich . . . that he tried to take credit for four years later . it's a joke . 
trump and that's a broken system . 
trump wrong . crosstalk 
paul but that means you'll put people in jail . crosstalk 
rubio no . and i and i think you've outlined why . the numbers don't add up . you know , when i ran for the senate in 2010 , i came out and said we're going to have to make changes to social security , and everyone said that's the end of your campaign . in florida , you can't talk about that , but people know that it's the truth here in florida . fraud is not enough . certainly , let's wipe out the fraud , but as you said , it won't add up . you already gave those numbers . the second point is on foreign aid . i hear that all the time as well . i'm against any sort of wasting of money on foreign aid , but it's less than 1 percent of our federal budget . the numbers don't add up . the bottom line is we can't just continue to tip toe around this and throw out things like i'm going to get at fraud and abuse . let's get rid of fraud , let's get rid of abuse , let's be more careful about how we spend foreign aid . but you still have hundreds of billions of dollars of deficit that you're going to have to make up . and here's the thing . if we do not do it , we will have a debt crisis . not to mention a crisis in social security and medicare . both parties have taken far too long to deal with it . it is one of the major issues confronting america . it's barely been asked in any of these debates . and we'd better deal with or we're going to have to explain to our children why they inherited this disaster . 
rubio well , i don't know anything about bankrupting four companies . you've bankrupted . . 
trump well , let me just you know , he wants to be a tough guy . a lot of times , you'll have you'll have and it didn't work very well . 
kasich mary katherine , let me just say this to you . you must have an agenda that you are ready to move on in the first 100 days . jeb is right . if you delay and you wait , the washington operators will take you down . i can tell you this , in the first 100 days , i will have legislation to freeze federal regulations , have them reviewed by the vice president , reduce state taxes on individuals , reduce taxes on corporations , have a fiscal plan to balance the budget , get the border protected and begin to fix social security in the first 100 days . so , anybody who is here tonight , if i get elected president , head out tomorrow and buy a seat belt , because there's going to be so much happening in the first 100 days , it's going to make your head spin . we're going to move america forward . i promise you . we're going to move us forward . 
fiorina well , mr . trump 
christie now maria , listen . i said right from the beginning that we should take no syrian refugees of any kind . and the reason i said that is because the fbi director told the american people , told congress , that he could not guarantee he could vet them and it would be safe . that's the end of the conversation . i can tell you , after spending seven years as a former federal prosecutor , right after 9 11 , dealing with this issue . here's the way you need to deal with it . you can't just ban all muslims . you have to ban radical islamic jihadists . you have to ban the people who are trying to hurt us . the only way to figure that out is to go back to getting the intelligence community the funding and the tools that it needs to be able to keep america safe . bell rings and this summer , we didn't do that . we took it away from the nsa , it was a bad decision by the president . bad by those in the senate who voted for it and if i'm president , we'll make our intelligence community strong , and won't have to keep everybody out , we're just going to keep the bad folk out and make sure they don't harm us . 
kasich ok , jake . 
trump yes , it's very simple . we're going to make a really dynamic economy from what we have right now , which is not at all dynamic . we're going to bring jobs back from japan , we're going to bring jobs back from china , we're going to bring , frankly , jobs back from mexico where , as you probably saw , nabisco is leaving chicago with one of their biggest plants , and they're moving it to mexico . we're going to bring jobs and manufacturing back . we're going to cut costs . we're going to save social security , and we're going to save medicare . 
trump he's wrong . he's wrong . 
cruz yes . yes . 
cruz well , under the definition of torture , no , it's not . under the law , torture is excruciating pain that is equivalent to losing organs and systems , so under the definition of torture , it is not . it is enhanced interrogation , it is vigorous interrogation , but it does not meet the generally recognized definition of torture . 
trump . . . we're going to have many different plans because . . . 
trump oh , you know what ? you know what ? take a look at trump steaks . 
carson i would have policies that wouldn't allow that to occur . i don't want to go in and tear anybody down . i mean , that doesn't help us . but what does help us is stop tinkering around the edges and fix the actual problems that exist that are creating the problem in the first place . 
rubio here's the broader point , as well , and then i think it touches on what donald just mentioned . barack obama views america as this arrogant global power that needed to be cut down to size . ok ? this is a president that views this country as a country that's been too powerful in the world and we create problems around the world . for example , it's one of the reasons why he had betrayed israel , because he believes that if we create separation from israel , it will help our relations in the islamic world . the same is happening in the asia pacific region with accommodations to north korea . north korean should be back on that list of terrorist nations , as an example . and donald's absolutely right . china does have a lot of influence over north korea and he should be leveraging our relationship with the chinese to ensure that north korea no longer has access to the resources that have allowed them a country that has no economy to develop long range missiles already capable of reaching the west coast of the united states potentially . 
cruz well , we've gotta turn the economy around for people who are struggling . the democrats' answer to everything is more government control over wages , and more empowering trial lawyers to file lawsuits . you know , you look at women working . i'll tell you , in my family there are a lot of single moms in my family . my sister was a single mom , both of my aunts who were a single moms . my mom who's here today , was a single mom when my father left us when i was 3 years old . now , thank god , my father was invited to a bible study and became born again and he came back to my mom and me and we were raised together . but i the struggle of single moms is extraordinary . and you know , when you see hillary clinton and bernie sanders and all the democrats talking about wanting to address the plight of working women , not a one of them mentioned the fact that under barack obama , 3 . 7 million women have entered poverty . not a one of them mentioned the fact that under barack obama and the big government economy , the median wage for women has dropped 733 . the the truth of the matter is , big government benefits the wealthy , it benefits the lobbyists , it benefits the giant corporations . and the people who are getting hammered are small businesses , it's single moms , it's hispanics . that is who i'm fighting for . the people that washington leaves behind . crosstalk 
fiorina . . . cut where you need to , and invest where you need to . . . 
fiorina . . . the kind of leadership that understands how to get results . 
kasich john . 
rubio . . . and when i do , i'm gonna jump in . 
kasich i don't understand this thing about assad . he has to go . assad is aligned with iran and russia . the one thing we want to prevent is we want to prevent iran being able to extend a shia crescent all across the middle east . assad has got to go . and there are moderates there . there are moderates in syria who we should be supporting . i do not support a civil war . i don't want to be policeman of the world . but we can't back off of this . and let me tell you , at the end , the saudis have agreed to put together a coalition inside of syria to stabilize that country . 
bush and i just did . 
cruz . . . on the issue on the issue of citizenship , donald . . . 
trump you've had nothing but problems with your credit cards , et cetera . so don't tell me about that . 
trump 
trump no , i said it worked in a couple of countries . . . 
cruz i'm too agreeable , easy going . laughter you know , i think my biggest weakness is exactly the opposite . i'm a fighter . i am passionate about what i believe . i've been passionate my whole life about the constitution . and , you know , for six and a half years , we've had a gigantic party . if you want someone to grab a beer with , i may not be that guy . but if you want someone to drive you home , i will get the job done and i will get you home . 
cruz if i'm elected president , let me tell you about my first day in office . the first thing i intend to do is to rescind every illegal and unconstitutional executive action taken by barack obama . the next thing i intend to do is instruct the department of justice to open an investigation into these videos and to prosecute planned parenthood for any criminal violations . the next thing i intend to do is instruct the department of justice and the irs to start sic persecuting religious liberty , and then intend to cancel the iran deal , and finally move the u . s . embassy in israel to jerusalem . i will keep my word . my father fled cuba , and i will fight to defend liberty because my family knows what it's like to lose it . 
cruz donald . . . 
kasich well , look , people still have to get to know me , so i want to spend my time talking about my experience reforming welfare , balancing budgets , cutting taxes , providing economic growth when i was in washington , turning ohio around . eight billion in the hole , 2 billion surplus , up over 300 , 000 jobs , big tax cuts , strengthening our credit . all those things matter but , you know , as a young man in my first election in 1978 , i defeated an incumbent democrat . i defeated an incumbent democrat in 1982 ; running on the reagan program , i was the only republican in america to defeat an incumbent democrat that year . and then , when i won for election of governor , i was the first republican to defeat an incumbent in 36 years , and the first person to have never run statewide out of politics for 10 years to beat an incumbent . that hadn't happened for 96 years . so , we'll get to the point where we'll talk about hillary clinton , or whoever the nominee is , record . but right now , i want to give people sense of hope , sense of purpose , a sense of unity , sense that we can do it . so . . . 
trump i know my people . 
trump i hope not . i truly hope not . i will say this . we have 25 , 30 , 000 people you've seen it yourself . people come with tremendous passion and love for the country , and when they see protest in some cases you know , you're mentioning one case , which i haven't seen , i heard about it , which i don't like . but when they see what's going on in this country , they have anger that's unbelievable . they have anger . they love this country . they don't like seeing bad trade deals , they don't like seeing higher taxes , they don't like seeing a loss of their jobs where our jobs have just been devastated . and i know i mean , i see it . there is some anger . there's also great love for the country . it's a beautiful thing in many respects . but i certainly do not condone that at all , jake . 
rubio no , that's you're wrong . in fact , the largest after tax gains is for the people at the lower end of the tax spectrum under my plan . and there's a bunch of things my tax plan does to help them . number one , you have people in this country that . . . 
trump but i . . . crosstalk 
paul the first thing i would do is i wouldn't arm our enemies . i wouldn't arm isis . cheering and applause most of the people who want to the no fly zone also favored arming the allies of al qaeda , which became isis . that was the dumbest , most foolhardy notion . and most of the people up here supported it . they wanted to arm the allies of al qaeda . some of them still do . that's how isis grew . we pushed back assad , and isis was allowed to grow in the vacuum . so the first thing you do is don't arm your enemies . crosstalk 
trump well , on afghanistan , i did mean iraq . i think you have to stay in afghanistan for a while , because of the fact that you're right next to pakistan , which has nuclear weapons , and we have to protect that . nuclear weapons change the game . and i was always against going into iraq . in fact , i believe me , i was always against it . there was some cases where i sort of in one interview with a great friend of mine , and yours , howard stern said that said that . . . laughter i said very meekly , long before we went in , i said very meekly , well , maybe , maybe , i don't know . by the time it got to that point , i was always against iraq . but afghanistan , i felt and in that one , if you notice , i corrected it the second day . ok ? second question ? 
trump that's not right . that is absolutely not right . you know that . that is not right . 
rubio and he's asking us to make him the president of the united states of america . crosstalk 
paul use the fourth amendment ! 
trump she should be running . 
trump ted was given to pacs . i mean , pacs you know , these super pacs are a disaster , by the way , folks . very corrupt . it's going to lead to lots of disasters . but ted has super pacs and you have to look at the people that are giving to those super pacs , number one . it's very important to do that . there is total control of the candidates , i know it better than anybody that probably ever lived . and i will tell you this , i know the system far better than anybody else and i know the system is broken . and i'm the one , because i know it so well because i was on both sides of it , i was on the other side all my life and i've always made large contributions . and frankly , i know the system better than anybody else and i'm the only one up here that's going to be able to fix that system because that system is wrong . 
fiorina i think it's a wonderful that that businesses start a 401 k . the point i'm making is this , the federal government should not be in a lot of things . there is no constitutional role for the federal government in setting up retirement plans . there is no constitutional role for the federal government to be setting minimum wages . . . 
carson well , it was very interesting having an opportunity to talk to the syrians themselves . and i asked them what do you want ? what is your supreme desire ? their supreme desire was to be settled back in their own country . i said , what can americans and other countries do ? they said , support the efforts of those who are trying to provide safety for us , including the jordanians . of course , they had a brand new hospital , for instance , that was unstaffed because there wasn't enough money to do it . but here's what's really neat . if you go into hasakah province in northeast syria , that's an area that's as big as lebanon . it's controlled by the kurds , the christians and the moderate sunnis . and there are airstrips and hotels . you could settle a lot of people there . all we would have to do is be willing to provide them with some weaponry , some defensive weaponry . and we seem to be afraid to give the kurds weaponry . we like to send it for some strange reason through baghdad , and then they only get a tenth of it . and if we would support them , we'd have a perfect ideal there . we don't need to set this up as we either take a bunch of refugees who will be infiltrated with terrorists , i guarantee you . for them not to be would be terrorist malpractice . and we need to to choose the right choice , not these false choices . 
rubio the world trade center came down because bill clinton didn't kill osama bin laden when he had the chance to kill him . 
kasich and we have a joint , good human intelligence . that is called a semi trip around the world . and if you gave me more time , i'd finish the trip . 
cruz good evening . 
trump we will see who's right at the end of a few years . but all of the almost all of the people , many , many people signed what's called the report card at the end , did you like the course , how did you like it . almost all of them said it was terrific , ok ? with letters , with this . some of them are on tape saying it was terrific . let's see what happens at the end of three years . 
kasich i don't intend to do that , and i going to be out there pushing it out don't worry about me and hillary . that will all work out , and i'm from ohio . she will not beat me there , i can promise you that . 
paul this is an important question . this is an incredibly important question . and the question goes to be , who do we want to be our commander in chief ? do you want a commander in chief who says something that we never did throughout the entire cold war , to discontinue having conversations with the russians ? i am not happy about them flying over there . but i'm not naive enough to say , well , iraq has them flying over their airspace , we're just going to announce that we're shooting them down ? that is naive to the point of being something you might hear in junior high . but it's scary . . . crosstalk 
cruz listen , if you are fed up with washington , the question you ought to be asking is who is willing to take on washington ? it's easy to have language , i'm fed up with the corruption in washington . but if you have a candidate who has been funding liberal democrats and funding the washington establishment , it's very hard to imagine how suddenly this candidate is going to take on washington . when i stood up and led the fight against obamacare , washington was furious and attacked me , but i did it because i was honoring my commitment to the hard working men and women of this country who are losing their jobs because of obamacare . when i led the fight against amnesty , it's because i was standing with the people . . . bell rings . . . against washington . and if you want to tell people you're going to stand against washington , the question we should ask is , when have you ever stood up to the lobbyists in washington ? 
kasich donald , if you . . . crosstalk 
walker and go forward and actually make a point . this is why 
trump i don't want to go . laughter 
bush let me finish , though . no , no , no hey , wait , wait , wait . just hold , major , hold , major . hold on , major . crosstalk 
kasich look , it takes three things basically to grow jobs . and i've done it when i was in washington when we had a balanced budget ; had four years of balanced budgets ; paid down a half trillion of debt . and our economy was growing like crazy . it's the same thing that i did in ohio . it's a simple formula common sense regulations , which is why i think we should freeze all federal regulations for one year , except for health and safety . it requires tax cuts , because that sends a message to the job creators that things are headed the right way . and if you tax cuts if you cut taxes for corporations , and you cut taxes for individuals , you're going to make things move , particularly the corporate tax , which is the highest , of course , in the in the world . but in addition to that , we have to have fiscal discipline . we have to show that we can march to a balanced budget . and when you do that , when you're in a position of managing regulations ; when you reduce taxes ; and when you have fiscal discipline , you see the job creators begin to get very comfortable with the fact that they can invest . right now , you don't have the you have taxes that are too high . you have regulations i mean , come on , they're affecting everybody here , particularly our small businesses . they are they're in a position where they're smothering people . and i mean , are you kidding me ? we're nowhere close to a balanced budget or fiscal discipline . those three things put together are going to give confidence to job creators and you will begin to see wages rise . you will begin to see jobs created in a robust economy . and how do i know it ? because i've done it . i did it as the chairman of the budget committee , working with senator domenici . and i've done it in the state of ohio as the chief executive . our wages are growing faster than the national average . we're running surpluses . and we can take that message and that formula to washington to lift every single american to a better life . 
trump . . . that is correct . 
kasich . . . to get the balance the federal budget balanced ? you have to plead with people . to do what we've done in ohio , you have to plead with people , then you go back down to washington and do the same thing . you see , we have to remind people we're americans before we're republicans and democrats , and when we wait , and when we delay what we end up doing , mary katharine , is we make the united states weaker . in fact , it's a foreign policy issue because people look at america not solving problems and they say what are they doing over there ? so the point is you have to work with people . the problem with executive authority for the president , it's really bad news for this reason . since he's given up on working with congress , he thinks he can impose anything he wants . he's not a king . he's a president . an executive order should be used frankly in consolidation and with consulting with the leadership in the in the congress . i've done it in ohio . i consult . i could use executive orders , but i don't trump the legislature , because if you do , you aggravate them , you anger them and then the long term prospects get bleak . we have to solve problems in america by coming together , republicans and democrats , americans first , party and ideology second in the second back seat of this country . that's what we need to do . and we can do it . and we can do it . 
paul get a judge to sign the warrant ! 
fiorina having . . . 
trump . . . excuse me . she's a brilliant judge . he's been criticizing he's been criticizing my sister for signing a certain bill . you know who else signed that bill ? justice samuel alito , a very conservative member of the supreme court , with my sister , signed that bill . so i think that maybe we should get a little bit of an apology from ted . what do you think ? 
trump and , i'll do that with the country . we will make america great again . and , thank you everybody . just for the record . 
trump inaudible 
paul we have make the decision now in syria , should we topple assad ? many up here wanted to topple assad , and it's like i said no , because if you do . . . 
kasich hey , wolf , let me just say this because he mentioned this . look , we're all in agreement that the japanese need to do more . we're all in agreement that the europeans need to do more , but i hate to just tell everybody we are the leader of the world and we should put the pressure on them to do their job . there is no question about it . but , at the same time , we also have to rebuild the military . look , i have a balanced budget plan that cuts taxes , reforms regulations , but also builds the military , puts a 100 billion dollars more in defense . we need to rebuild our defenses , but , i must also tell you , a long time reformer of the pentagon , we must reform that building . bell ringing we can't have a weapon system take 22 and a half years . we have 800 , 000 bureaucrats working for dod , performing bureaucratic functions when we ought to be putting . . . 
trump let me tell you , something , ted . the last person that hillary clinton wants to face is donald trump . that i can . . . 
christie . . . the fact is the fact is the reason why that no one wants to answer entitlements up here is because it's hard . it's a hard problem . and i'm the only one up on this stage who back in april put forward a detailed entitlement reform plan that will save over 1 trillion , save social security , save medicare , and avoid this avoid what hillary rodham clinton will do to you . because what she will do is come in and she will raise social security taxes . bernie sanders has already said it . and she is just one or two more poll drops down from even moving further left than she's moved already to get to the left of bernie on this . we have seniors out there who are scared to death because this congress this one that we have right now , just stole 150 billion from the social security retirement fund to give it to the social security disability fund . a republican congress did that . and the fact is it was wrong . and they consorted with barack obama to steal from social security . we need to reform social security . mine is the only plan that saves over 1 trillion and that's why i'm answering your question . 
trump i've seen you . 
cruz you know , people are actually watching this at home . 
walker mr . trump , you're using the talking points of the democrats . . . 
rubio if you'll answer the inaudible core question . 
trump well , you know , i don't mind trade wars when we're losing 58 billion a year , you want to know the truth . we're losing so much . we're losing so much with mexico and china with china , we're losing 500 billion a year . and then people say , don't we want to trade ? i don't mind trading , but i don't want to lose 500 billion . i don't want to lose 58 billion . mexico just took carrier corporation , maker of air conditioners . they just took ford . they're building a 2 . 5 billion plant . they just took nabisco out of chicago . and i always say i'm not having oreos anymore , which is true , by the way . but they just took a big plant from nabisco into mexico . they're taking our businesses . i don't mind . 
cruz well , listen , adoption is decided at the state level and i am a believer in the 10th amendment in the constitution , i would leave the question of marriage to the states , i would leave the question of adoption to the states . that's the way it has been for two centuries of our nation's history until five unelected judges in an illegitimate and wrong decision decided to seize the authority over marriage and wrongfully tear down the marriage laws of all 50 states . now , interconnected to this is the question of religious liberty . and at the last debate , one of my colleagues on this stage said on the question of religious liberty and supreme court nominees that he'd be willing to compromise and negotiate . i can tell you , for me , there are areas that we should compromise on . marginal tax rates , we can reach a middle ground on . but when it comes to core principles and convictions , when it comes to the constitution and bill of rights , i can tell the men and women at home i will never compromise away your religious liberty . and for me , bret , religious liberty has been a lifelong passion . i've spent two decades defending religious liberty , including defending the ten commandments before the u . s . supreme court and winning . defending the pledge of allegiance before the supreme court and winning . and defending the mojave desert veterans memorial , a lone white latin cross that was erected to honor the men and women who gave their lives in world war i . i represented 3 million veterans for free defending that memorial and we won 5 4 before the supreme court . 
kasich . . . yes , sir . . . 
huckabee well , i would really appreciate that . first of all , yes , we've stolen . yes , we've lied to the american people about social security , and medicare . but , you know what we're not telling them ? it's their money . this isn't the governments money . this is not entitlement , it's not welfare . this is money that people have confiscated out of their paychecks . everytime they got a paycheck , the government reached in and took something out of it before they ever saw it . now , we're going to blame the people . today congress decided to take another 150 billion dollars away from social security so they can borrow more money . that makes no sense to everybody . and , they're always going to say , well , we're going to fix this one day . no their not . it's like a 400 pound man saying , i'm going to go on a diet , but i'm eating a sack of krispy kremes before i do . and , people are sick of believing that the government is never going to really address this . but , let me tell you who not to blame . let's quit blaming the people on social security . let's quit making it a problem for them . it's like them getting mugged , and then us saying , well , we're going to mug you some more . you ought to just be able to get over it , get used to it . . . 
cruz you know , we need a president who understands the national security interests of this country . the reason we are friends and allies with israel is they are a liberal democratic country that share our values , they're our strongest ally in the region . we get billions in intelligence resources , billions in military resources . and the palestinian authority that donald , along with hillary clinton and barack obama say they want to treat neutrally , the same as israel . the palestinian authority is in a unity government with hamas , a terrorist organization . they pay the families of these terrorists who murder people . and this is exactly the moral relativism barack obama has . and the answer is not scream , all muslims bad . let me give you an example of a muslim for example , we ought to be standing with , president el sisi of egypt , a president of a muslim country who is targeting radical . . . bell rings . . . islamic terrorist . 
fiorina . . . mostly , apparently , leadership . . . 
paul well , you know , the thing is that . . . 
trump . . . more than 10 billion . 
trump don't make things up . jeb , don't make things up . come on . 
rubio well , first of all , let's understand why we are even having this and why donald tapped in to some of that anger that's out there about this whole issue . because this president has consistently underestimated the threat of isis . if you listen to the state of the union the other night , he described them as a bunch of guys with long beards on the back of a pickup truck . they are much more than that . this is a group of people that enslaves women and sells them , sells them as brides . this is a group of people that burns people in cages , that is conducting genocide against christians and yazidis and others in the region . this is not some small scale group . they are radicalizing people in the united states , they are conducting attacks around the world . so you know what needs to happen , it's a very simple equation , and it's going to happen when i'm president . if we do not know who you are , and we do not know why you are coming when i am president , you are not getting into the united states of america . 
trump look , the problem is we need toughness . honestly , i think jeb is a very nice person . he's a very nice person . but we need tough people . we need toughness . we need intelligence and we need tough . jeb said when they come across the southern border they come as an act of love . 
rubio you know , as i said already twice in this , we have a very serious problem in this country . we have a president of the united states that is undermining this country's security and expanding the role of . . . 
trump no , i don't think he's suggesting that at all . i mean . . . crosstalk 
kasich no , no , no . i want to i want to i want to say something about what the senator just said . 
trump well , i think bush did a hell of a bad as far as that's concerned . you know it and so do i . 
bush and governor haley is ranked at the top . crosstalk 
trump hold on . . . 
kasich this is the fantasy that i talked about in the beginning . 
bush first of all , i'd like to recognize governor haley for her incredible leadership in the aftermath of the the emanuel ame church killings . and i also want to recognize the people in that church that showed the grace of god and the grace of forgiveness and the mercy that they showed . i don't know if any of us could have done what they did , one after another , within 48 hours of that tragedy taking place . look , here's the deal , in this particular case , the fbi made a mistake . the law itself requires a background check , but that didn't fulfill their part of the bargain within the time that they were supposed to do . we don't need to add new rules , we need to make sure the fbi does its job . because that person should not have gotten a gun , should not would not have passed a background check . the first impulse of barack obama and hillary clinton is to take rights away from law abiding citizens . that's what they do , whether it's the san bernardino attack or if it's these tragedies that take place , i think we need to focus on what the bigger issue is . it isn't law abiding gun owners . look , i have an a plus rating in the nra and we also have a reduction in gun violence because in florida , if you commit a crime with a gun , you're going away . you're going away for a long , long while . and that's what we should focus on is the violence in our communities . target the efforts for people that are committing crimes with guns , and if you do that , and get it right , you're going to be much better off than creating a political argument where there's a big divide . the other issue is mental health . that's a serious issue that we could work on . republicans and democrats alike believe this . the president's first impulse is do this by executive order , power he doesn't have . why not go to congress and in a bipartisan way , begin to deal with the process of mental health issues so that people that are spiraling out of control because of mental health challenges don't have access to guns . 
trump correct . i will not let people die on the streets if i'm president . 
bush we said no . and that's the simple fact . the simple fact is 
christie i was crosstalk 
trump thank you . over the years , i've created tens of thousands of jobs and a great company . it's a company i'm very proud of . some of the most iconic assets anywhere in the world . and i will tell you , i don't have to give you a website because i'm self funding my campaign . i'm putting up my own money . i want to do something really special . i want to make our country greater than it's ever been . i think we have that potential . we cannot lose this election . we cannot let hillary clinton , who is the worst secretary of state in the history of our country , win this election . we will fight . we will win . and we truly will make this even more special . we have to make it better than ever before . and i will tell you , the united states can actually be better than ever before . thank you . 
bush and the net result was you tried . 
trump very nice words , but happens to be wrong . cnn just came out with a poll two days ago that . . . 
trump . . . well , i'd like to respond , i'd like to respond . . . 
trump but atlantic city is a disaster 
trump you haven't hired one person , you liar . 
trump well , all of a sudden , i hear for 40 years i've been involved in washington . i have been supporting people for many years . and these people have been politicians , and they've been on both sides , democrats , republicans , liberals , conservatives . i've supported everybody , because , until recently , i wasn't a politician , and i hope maybe you don't all consider me a politician right now . i hate the term politician . but i've been supporting politicians . a recent article somewhere said donald trump is a world class businessman who goes out and he does get along with everybody . i've supported democrats , and i've supported republicans . and as a businessman , i owed that to my company , to my family , to my workers , to everybody to get along . part of the problem we have in washington , chris . . . 
kasich no , i don't . i think there is a sect of , you know , this radical islam that is really , really serious , and poses the greatest threat to us today . there isn't any question . and that's why the whole world has to work together to make sure that we don't have proliferation of these weapons of mass destruction . but look , i was there when , and saw it , when the egyptian ambassador to the united states was in the rose garden bringing the arab muslim world to work with us to repel saddam hussein from kuwait . the fact is that if we're going to defeat isis , we're going to have to have these countries . and they are egypt . and they are saudi arabia . and they are jordan . and they are the gulf states . and we're going to have in some way or another a rapprochement with turkey . and i frankly think the europeans went in the wrong direction when they rejected turkey from joining in to the economic sphere of europe . the simple fact of the matter is , a lot of these muslim countries , they are just they can't believe the stuff they see out of people who have distorted their faith . look , the people who represent radical islam , they want to destroy everything that we're about and other muslims who don't share their view . but at the end of the day , we've got to bring the world together , the civilized world . and we all speak with one voice to make sure that people who sit on the fence understand what civilization is , and we represent it , and equality and hope for everybody . 
rubio no jeb , i don't remember well , let me tell you . i don't remember you ever complaining about john mccain's vote record . the only reason why you're doing it now is because we're running for the same position , and someone has convinced you that attacking me is going to help you . 
fiorina a track record of leadership is not a game . it is the issue in this election . 
trump i think i think , for me , nuclear is just the power , the devastation is very important to me . 
bush can i just . . . 
trump you know why ? 
fiorina you know , every election we hear a lot of talk . we hear a lot of good plans . we hear actually a lot of good intentions . but somehow for decades , nothing really has changed . what we need now is a proven leader who has produced results . that's how you go from secretary to ceo . you lead and you produce results . i will cut this government down to size and hold it accountable , simplify the tax code , roll back the regulations that have been spewing out of washington , d . c . for 50 years . i may not be your dream candidate just yet , but i can assure you i am hillary clinton's worst nightmare . and in your heart of hearts , you cannot wait to see a debate between hillary clinton and carly fiorina . i will tell you this , i will beat hillary clinton . and with your vote and your support and your prayers , i will lead with the citizens of this great nation the resurgence of this great nation . 
cruz chris , i believe the american people are looking for someone to speak the truth . if you're looking for someone to go to washington , to go along to get along , to get to agree with the career politicians in both parties who get in bed with the lobbyists and special interests , then i ain't your guy . there is a reason . . . . . . . that we have 18 trillion in debt . because as conservatives , as republicans , we keep winning elections . we got a republican house , we've got a republican senate , and we don't have leaders who honor their commitments . i will always tell the truth and do what i said i would do . 
christie jake , you brought my issue up . 
trump i'm not afraid inaudible . 
trump because i have used the laws of this country just like the greatest people that you read about every day in business have used the laws of this country , the chapter laws , to do a great job for my company , for myself , for my employees , for my family , et cetera . i have never gone bankrupt , by the way . i have never . but out of hundreds of deals . . . 
trump in wisconsin , you're losing 2 . 2 billion right now . 
trump there are many , many civil cases . 
rubio well , first of all , let me say that on the issue of the off the record , that's not up to the new york times . that's up to you , donald . if tonight you tell the new york times to release the audio , they will do it , and we can exactly see what your true views are on immigration . . . 
bush how tough it is to take away a property from an elderly woman ? 
rubio . . . and only now does he say . . . crosstalk 
christie well , wolf , i'll tell you what reckless is . what reckless is is calling assad a reformer . what reckless is allowing russia to come into crimea and ukraine . what reckless is is inviting russia into syria to team with iran . that is reckless . and the reckless people are the folks in the white house right now . barack obama and hillary clinton are the reckless people . and if you think that a no fly zone is a reckless policy , you're welcome to your opinion . but how is it working so far ? as we have 250 , 000 syrians murdered , slaughtered ; millions running around the world , running for their lives . it's not working . we need to try something else . and that is not reckless . 
rubio and you know what they got ? they got to take a picture with a cardboard cutout of donald trump . . . 
cruz if you want to watch the video , go to our website at tedcruz . org . 
kasich fix america , this is the formula . it worked for reagan and it works for our team in ohio . thank you . 
walker two parts to that , one on china , one back for a second on iran . when it comes to china , why would we be giving an official state visit to a country that's been involved in a massive cyber attack against the united states ? that's not just a visit , that's a 21 gun salute on the south lawn of the white house . it just doesn't make any sense . if we're ever going to send a message to them , wouldn't this be the time , when they've issued this , sort of , massive attack against us ? and , jake , for the question , i was one of the first ones to call for terminating the bad deal with iran on day one . the president came after me and said i need to bone up . you know , the president who called isis the jv squad said i needed to bone up . the reality is it's a bad deal on day one , and it's a bad deal because this president has allowed iran to go closer , and closer . i'd love to play cards with this guy because barack obama folds on everything with iran . we need a leader who's going to stand up , and actually inaudible . . . 
kasich good evening . 
fiorina . . . to invest in our military technology , and we need to care for our veterans so 307 , 000 . . . 
rubio because and i don't know if donald realizes this . i'm sure it's not his intent perhaps . but the position you've taken is an anti israel position . and here's why . because you cannot be an honest broker in a dispute between two sides in which one of the sides is constantly acting in bad faith . the palestinian authority has walked away from multiple efforts to make peace , very generous offers from the israels . instead , here's what the palestinians do . they teach their four year old children that killing jews is a glorious thing . here's what hamas does . they launch rockets and terrorist attacks again israel on an ongoing basis . the bottom line is , a deal between israel and the palestinians , given the current makeup of the palestinians , is not possible . and so the next president of the united states needs to be someone like me who will stand firmly on the side of israel . i'm not i'm not going to sit here and say , oh , i'm not on either side . i will be on a side . i will be on israel's side every single day because they are the only pro american , free enterprise democracy in the entire middle east . 
trump he scammed the people of florida . he scammed people . he doesn't vote . he doesn't show up for the u . s . senate . he doesn't vote . he scammed the people . he defrauded the people of florida . 
trump excuse me . excuse me . 
trump i hope that answers your question . i mean , you are in the senate , but i hope that answers your question . 
cruz you're an american , as is everybody else on this stage , and i would suggest we focus on who's best prepared to be commander in chief , because that's the most important question facing the country . 
trump . . . yes . . . 
trump we made a mistake going into iraq . i've never said we made a mistake . . . 
trump . . . that's wrong . 
kasich i did 200 meetings in new hampshire , i don't know how many in michigan now . in these townhalls people come in and they're very emotional meetings . and , you know what they really want to know ? if somebody tells them something , can they believe it ? and , the reason why people are so upset in this country is because politicians all the time tell them what they want to hear . and , they go to washington , or they go to the state capital , wherever , and they don't deliver on those promises . you know , when i ran for governor of ohio , i said not only would we balance the budget , but we would cut taxes . people said that can't be done . i wouldn't have said it if i didn't believe it . we cut taxes in ohio more than any governor in the country , and 5 billion dollars worth of tax cuts we're not running a surplus in ohio . but , you see , what's getting in the hearts and souls of the people is they want change , and they keep putting outsiders in to bring about the change , then the change doesn't come . then they put more outsiders in because we're putting people in that don't understand compromise . they don't understand policy . . . bell ringing . . . they're getting more and more frustrated with the system which is why we must pick somebody that has a record of achievement , not just talk . 
rubio chris , everybody you said you weren't going to go back . he told everyone he wasn't going to go back . they had to shame him into going back . and when he decided to go back , he criticized the young lady , saying , what am i supposed to do , go back with a mop and clean up the flooding ? 
cruz well , listen , hugh , everyone understands why donald has suggested what he has . we're looking at a president who's engaged in this double speak where he doesn't call radical islamic terrorism by its name . indeed , he gives a speech after the san bernardino attack where his approach is to try to go after the constitutional rights of law abiding citizens rather than to keep us safe . and even worse , president obama and hillary clinton are proposing bringing tens of thousands of syrian refugees to this country when the head of the fbi has told congress they cannot vet those refugees . i understand why donald made that proposal . i introduced legislation in the senate that i believe is more narrowly focused at the actual threat , which is radical islamic terrorism , and what my legislation would do is suspend all refugees for three years from countries where isis or al qaida control substantial territory . 
cruz you can do it . you can breathe . i know it's hard . i know it's hard . but just . . . 
trump well , i'll tell you what , with hillary clinton , i said be at my wedding and she came to my wedding . you know why ? she didn't have a choice because i gave . i gave to a foundation that , frankly , that foundation is supposed to do good . i didn't know her money would be used on private jets going all over the world . it was . but . . . timer sounds crosstalk 
kasich well , look , my record speaks for itself . what i talk about tonight is not a theory . these are things that i've done . i was there when we reformed the pentagon on a bipartisan basis to give control to the commanders in the field and force the services to work together . i was the chief architect , along with senator domenici , of the last time we balanced the budget and the first time since we walked on the moon . i was there when i worked on the welfare reform in washington . and we got it done and we eliminated the entitlement on welfare , i then went to ohio and took ohio from a basket case , working in a bipartisan basis to reform many things , including the cleveland public schools , working with a democratic mayor . my problem isn't that people don't know this . they say , well , what does that mean ? does that mean you're too easy ? well , let me tell you , when we did the balanced budget , we cut the capital gains tax , we provided a family tax credit , we shrunk the government . in my state , the state of ohio , has the smallest government in the state of ohio in 30 years . conservative principles will work . but show respect to the other side . one final thing , in regard to social security , we will not get that done alone . we will have to have some responsible democrats who will come in to fix the problem of social security . i know how to do it because i've done it and i'll do it again . 
cruz you cannot . laughter 
trump well , first of all , self deportation is people are going to leave as soon as they see others going out . if you look at dwight eisenhower in the 1950s , they started moving people out and the rest of them left . self deportation , as i really define it , and that's the way i define it , is you're going to get some to go , and the rest are going to go out . as far as the people that i've hired in various parts of florida during the absolute prime season , like palm beach and other locations , you could not get help . it's the up season . people didn't want to have part time jobs . there were part time jobs , very seasonal , 90 day jobs , 120 day jobs , and you couldn't get . everybody agrees with me on that . they were part time jobs . you needed them , or we just might as well close the doors , because you couldn't get help in those hot , hot sections of florida . 
rubio there were americans in that hot area . 
trump i fully understand . 
trump i'm not i'm not are i don't think you heard me . you're having a hard time tonight . 
trump i'm changing . i'm changing . we need highly skilled people in this country , and if we can't do it , we'll get them in . but , and we do need in silicon valley , we absolutely have to have . so , we do need highly skilled , and one of the biggest problems we have is people go to the best colleges . they'll go to harvard , they'll go to stanford , they'll go to wharton , as soon as they're finished they'll get shoved out . they want to stay in this country . they want to stay here desperately , they're not able to stay here . for that purpose , we absolutely have to be able to keep the brain power in this country . 
paul wolf , this legislation . . . 
trump george bush made a mistake . we can make mistakes . but that one was a beauty . we should have never been in iraq . we have destabilized the middle east . 
carson alright . you know , what we do in order to get the information that we need is our business , and i wouldn't necessarily be broadcasting what we're going to do . we . . . uh . . . we've gotten into this this mindset of fighting politically correct wars . there is no such thing as a politically correct war . and , the left , of course , will say carson doesn't believe in the geneva convention . carson doesn't believe in fighting stupid wars . and and what we have to remember is we want to utilize the tremendous intellect that we have in the military to win wars . and i've talked to a lot of the generals , a lot of our advanced people . and believe me , if we gave them the mission , which is what the commander in chief does , they would be able to carry it out . and if we don't tie their hands behind their back , they will do it . . . timer sounds . . . extremely effectively . 
cruz well , the numbers the tax foundation had put out is that the static cost of the plan is 3 . 6 trillion over 10 years , but the dynamic cost of the plan , which which is the cost that factors in growth , is about 768 billion . it is less than a trillion . it costs less than virtually every other plan people have put up here , and yet it produces more growth and it's one of the very few plans that abolishes the irs . but on top of that , today , we rolled out a spending plan . 500 billion in specific cuts five major agencies that i would eliminate . the irs , the department of commerce , the department of energy , the department of commerce , and hud and then 25 specific programs . again , that's on our website at tedcruz . org . you want to look at specificity ? it's easy for everyone to say , cut spending . it's much harder and riskier to put out , chapter and verse , specifically the programs you would cut to stop bankrupting our kids and grandkids . 
trump . . . with what marco is saying is that it takes too long , they're sucking us dry and it takes too long . it would just you absolutely have to get involved with china , they are taking so much of what we have in terms of jobs in terms of money . we just can't do it any longer . 
rubio not me . 
trump hello . 
bush we don't need the federal government to be involved in this , because when they do we create a 1 . 2 trillion debt . in florida , we have the lowest in state tuition of any state , because there's accountability , just as john said . let the states do this . you'll create a much better graduation rate at a lower cost , and you won't in debt the next generation with recourse debt on their backs . it's always a solution of the left to create more government from the federal government . it is broke , it is not working . crosstalk 
carson no one is ever better off with dictators but there comes a time you know , when you're on an airplane , they always say , in case of an emergency oxygen masks will drop down . put yours on first and then administer help to your neighbor . we need oxygen right now . and we need to start thinking about the needs of the american people before we go and solve everybody else's problems . the fact of the matter is , is that the middle east has been in turmoil for thousands of years . for us to think that we're going to in there and fix that with a couple of little bombs and a few little decorations is relatively foolish . 
trump . . . and , you're going to see excuse me . you're going to see preexisting conditions and everything else be part of it , but the price will be done , and the insurance companies can pay . right now they're making a fortune . 
rubio well , i would love the relationship between cuba and the united states to change . but it will require cuba to change , at least its government . today , it has not . the fact of the matter is that after these changes were made after these changes were made , there are now millions and hundreds of millions of dollars that will flow to the castro regime . it will now allow them to become set permanent and in stone . they will now be able to carry out a transition where the military continues to run the country there . they'll put a puppet figure forward as their new president . and nothing will change for the cuban people . there has not been a single democratic opening ; not a single change on the island in human rights . in fact , things are worse than they were before this opening . the only thing that's changed as a result of this opening is that now the cuban government has more sources of money from which to build out their repressive apparatus and maintain themselves there permanently . and we asked nothing in return . compare that to the changes that were required in burma . and by no means is burma a perfect country . but at least when there was a democratic opening to burma , they were required to make some democratic openings . when there was a diplomatic opening , it required democratic opening . and today , the former minority party is now the majority party in their legislative body . he asked nothing in return and we are getting nothing in return . and cuba and its regime remains an anti american communist dictatorship , helped north korea evade u . n . sanctions . it's harboring fugitives of american justice , including people stealing our medicare money and moving back to cuba , all in exchange for nothing . 
rubio oh , he lied 38 years ago . all right , i guess there's a statute of limitation on lies . laughter and applause 
cruz . . . our our . . . 
rubio they lost their money . yes , licensing , but you told them you owned the building . so they gave him his money . they lost their money . time and again . . . 
kasich i've got to tell you , this is just crazy , huh ? laughter this is just nuts , o . k . ? jeez , oh , man . i'm sorry , john . 
rubio you may not be aware of this , donald , because you don't follow this stuff very closely , but here's what happened . when they passed obamacare they put a bailout fund in obamacare . all these lobbyists you keep talking about , they put a bailout fund in the law that would allow public money to be used , taxpayer money , to bail out companies when they lost money . and , we led the effort and wiped out that bailout fund . the insurance companies are not in favor of me , they hate that . they're suing that now to get that bailout money put back in . here's what you didn't hear in that answer , and this is important guys , this is an important thing . what is your plan ? i understand the lines around the state , whatever that means . this is not a game where you draw maps . . . 
trump and that's a huge of course it is . we are going to buy things for less money . of course it is . that works out . . . 
cruz well , existing law provides that those who are deported cannot come back here legally . u . s . citizens can come back . that's existing law . but let me say , wolf , i really find it amazing that donald believes that he is the one who discovered the issue of illegal immigration . i can tell you , when i ran for senate here in the state of texas , i ran promising to lead the fight against amnesty , promising to fight to build a wall . and in 2013 , when i was fight against the gang of eight amnesty bill , where was donald ? he was firing dennis rodman on celebrity apprentice . laughter and indeed , if you look at the gang of eight , one individual on this stage broke his promise to the men and women who elected him and wrote the amnesty bill . if you look at the eight members of the gang of eight , donald gave over 50 , 000 to three democrats and two republicans . and when you're funding open border politicians , you shouldn't be surprised when they fight for open borders . and i think if you want to know who actually will secure the borders and follow through , you ought to ask who has a record before they were a candidate for president of fighting to secure the borders and stop amnesty . and i'm the only one on this stage that has that record . and by the way , marco is exactly right that a federal court found donald guilty of being part of a conspiracy to hire people illegally and entered a 1 million judgment against him . 
kasich i wanna tell you , in my state , we took medicaid , the hardest program to control , and we took it from a 10 percent growth rate to 2 . 5 percent without taking one person off the rolls or cutting one single benefit . and so much of what we did to force competition , to use technology , to stand down the special interest groups can you imagine taking medicaid from 10 to 2 . 5 percent ? we can take many of those same procedures , we can apply it to medicare . we can make a stronger program . but i agree with jeb , you can't just do this by growing the economy . you can't grow your way out of demographics . but we can give people better health care . and finally , on health care , why don't we start treating keep giving . . . 
trump maria , we're a country of laws . we either have a country or we don't have a country . we are a country of laws . going to have to go out and they will come back but they are going to have to go out and hopefully they get back . but we have no choice if we're going to run our country properly and if we're going to be a country . cheering and applause 
kasich . . . incentives for people to keep people healthy , rather than giving the incentives to treat them when they're sick ? 
bush none of which is true . 
trump i've made over 10 billion . i had a casino company caesars just filed for bankruptcy . chris will tell you it's not chris' fault either but almost everybody in atlantic city is either in trouble or filed for maybe i'll blame chris . 
kasich no , no , it's really important , dana . we got to talk about what we would be willing to shut down for . why don't we put tax reform on this president's desk , and make him veto it if that's what he wants to do ? why haven't we repealed and replaced obamacare ? make him veto if that's what he wants to do . 
trump . . . small business . . . 
bush i got about four minutes in the last debate . i'm going to get my question right now . 
trump ok , just so you understand i know so much about trading about with china . carl icahn today as you know endorsed . many businessmen want to endorse me . 
bush established by the courts federal , state courts . 
carson before you ask the question , can i respond to the you know , they mentioned my name a couple of times . 
trump . . . i'm changing it , and i'm softening the position because we have to have talented people in this country . 
rubio but that's not an accurate description of the plan . because , first of all , you may rename the irs but you are not going to abolishes the irs , because there has to be some agency that's going to collect your vat tax . someone's going to be collecting this tax . in fact , ronald reagan's treasury , when ronald reagan's treasury looked at the vat tax , you know what they found ? that they were going to have to hire 20 , 000 new irs agencies to collect it . the second point , it does not eliminate the corporate tax or the payroll tax . businesses will now have to pay 16 percent on the money they make . they will also have to pay 16 percent on the money they pay their employees . so there are people watching tonight in business . if you are now hit on a 60 percent tax on both your income and on the wages you pay your employees , where are you going to get that money from ? you're going to get it by paying your employees less and charging your customers more , that is a tax , the difference is , you don't see it on the bill . and that's why ronald reagan said that it was a blindfold . you blindfold the american people so that they cannot see the true cost of government . now 16 percent is what the rate ted wants it at . but what happens if , god forbid , the next barack obama takes over , and the next nancy pelosi , and the next harry reid . . . bell rings . . . and they decide , we're going to raise it to 30 percent , plus we're going to raise the income tax to 30 percent . now , you've got europe . crosstalk 
kasich well , right now the deals there's no leadership . i mean , a lot of the things that we're talking about here tonight , on the border , and so many of the things . what we should be doing on foreign policy , you know what the problem is , mary katharine ? there's not a leader that gets somebody to rise up . you have to have a leader that can inspire , and actually some of what donald was saying is true . look , do you know how hard it was . . . 
trump that's true . that's true . 
rubio . . . and , here's why he does it this way , let me explain why he inaudible 
bush well , the deal was done . barack obama got his massive tax increase , and there was no spending cuts . you just see the recent deal announced today or yesterday , more spending , more tax increasing , more regulation . and now we have to accept 2 percent , the new normal for economic growth . and the net result is the middle class has 2 , 300 less in their pockets than the day that barack obama got elected president . and now they see hillary clinton proposing a third term of economic policy for our country . we need to reverse that . and my record was one of cutting taxes each and every year . you don't have to guess about it , because i actually have a record . 19 billion of tax cuts , 1 . 3 million jobs created . we were one of two states to go to aaa bond rating , and our government spending was far less than the spending in people's income . 
rubio the answer is , he's not going to do it . and you know why ? because there are plenty of clothing makers in america . crosstalk 
fiorina immigration did not come up in 2016 because mr . trump brought it up . we talked about it in 2012 , we talked about it in 2008 . we talked about it in 2004 . 
rubio . . . as you asked earlier today . 
trump there are many lawyers . 
cruz what what you're from new york ? so you might not . laughter but i promise you , in the state of south carolina , they do . and listen , there are many , many wonderful , wonderful working men and women in the state of new york . but everyone understands that the values in new york city are socially liberal or pro abortion or pro gay marriage , focus around money and the media . and and i would note indeed , the reason i said that is i was asked my friend donald has taken to it as advance playing bruce springsteen's born in the usa , and i was asked what i thought of that . and i said , well , if he wanted to play a song , maybe he could play , 'new york , new york' ? and and you know , the concept of new york values is not that complicated to figure out . not too many years ago , donald did a long interview with tim russert . and in that interview , he explained his views on a whole host of issues that were very , very different from the views he's describing now . and his explanation he said , look , i'm from new york , that's what we believe in new york . those aren't iowa values , but this is what we believe in new york . and so that was his explanation . and and i guess i can can frame it another way . not a lot of conservatives come out of manhattan . i'm just saying . laughter 
trump well , ok , i never said that . 
rubio . . . and , our nominee needs to be someone that stands by those things . . . 
bush it's a public use . it's a public use . 
cruz well , marco has been floating this attack for a few weeks now , but the problem is , the business flat tax in my proposal is not a vat . a vat is imposed as a sales tax when you buy a good . this is a business flat tax . it is imposed on business and a critical piece that marco seems to be missing is that this 16 percent business flat tax enables us to eliminate the corporate income tax . it goes away . it enables us to eliminate the death tax . if you're a farmer , if you're a rancher , if you are small business owner , the death tax is gone . we eliminate the payroll tax , we eliminate the obamacare taxes . and listen , there is a real difference between marco's tax plan and mine . mine gives every american a simple , flat tax of 10 percent . marco's top tax rate is 35 percent . my tax plan enables you to fill out your taxes on a postcard so we can abolish the irs . marco leaves the irs code in with all of the complexity . we need to break the washington cartel , and the only way to do it is to end all the subsidies and all . . . bell rings . . . the mandates and have a simple flat tax . the final observation , invoked ronald reagan . i would note that art laffer , ronald reagan's chief economic adviser , has written publicly , that my simple flat tax is the best tax plan of any of the individuals on this stage cause it produces economic growth , it raises wages and it helps everyone from the very poorest to the very richest . 
cruz it's a yes or no . 
fiorina dana , i would like to link these two issues , both of which are incredibly important , iran and planned parenthood . one has something to do with the defense of the security of this nation . the other has something to do with the defense of the character of this nation . you have not heard a plan about iran from any politician up here , here is my plan . on day one in the oval office , i will make two phone calls , the first to my good friend to bibi netanyahu to reassure him we will stand with the state of israel . the second , to the supreme leader , to tell him that unless and until he opens every military and every nuclear facility to real anytime , anywhere inspections by our people , not his , we , the united states of america , will make it as difficult as possible and move money around the global financial system . we can do that , we don't need anyone's cooperation to do it . and every ally and every adversary we have in this world will know that the united states in america is back in the leadership business , which is how we must stand with our allies . as regards planned parenthood , anyone who has watched this videotape , i dare hillary clinton , barack obama to watch these tapes . watch a fully formed fetus on the table , it's heart beating , it's legs kicking while someone says we have to keep it alive to harvest its brain . this is about the character of our nation , and if we will not stand up in and force president obama to veto this bill , shame on us . 
trump i can only say this , and i've said it loud and clear and i've said it for years . and many of these people are sitting right in the audience right now your lobbyist and your special interest and your donors , because the audience is packed with them , and they're packed with you . i've had an amazing relationship with politicians with politicians both democrat , republican , because i was a businessman . as one magazine said , he's a world class businessman ; he was friendly with everybody . i got along with everybody . you get along with nobody . you don't have one republican you don't have one republican senator , and you work with them every day of your life , although you skipped a lot of time . these are minor details . but you don't have one republican senator backing you ; not one . you don't have the endorsement of one republican senator and you work with these people . you should be ashamed of yourself . 
cruz it is also the case that that rubio schumer amnesty bill , one of the things it did is it expanded barack obama's power to let in syrian refugees . it enabled him the president to certify them en masse without mandating meaningful background checks . i think that's a mistake . that's why i've been leading the fight to stop it . and i would note the senate just a few weeks ago voted to suspend refugees from middle eastern countries . i voted yes to suspend that . marco voted on the other side . so you don't get to say we need to secure the borders , and at the same time try to give barack obama more authority to allow middle eastern refugees coming in , when the head of the fbi tells us they cannot vet them to determine if they are isis terrorists . 
paul . . . and i've said and i've said i would cut spending , and i've said exactly where . each one of my budgets has taken a meat axe to foreign aid , because i think we ought to quit sending it to countries that hate us . i think we ought to quit sending it to countries that burn our flag . israel is not one of those . but even benjamin netanyahu said that ultimately , they will be stronger when they're independent . my position is exactly the same . we shouldn't borrow money from china to send it anywhere , but why don't we start with eliminating aid to our enemies . 
kasich listen , i want to just comment . 
christie listen , senator , you know , when you're sitting in a subcommittee , just blowing hot air about this , you can say things like that . when you're responsible for protecting the lives of the american people , then what you need to do is to make sure . . . 
bush yeah . 
bush the very basic fact is that vladimir putin is not going to be an ally of the united states . the whole world knows this . it's a simple , basic fact . they're not taking out they're not even attempting to take out isis . they're attacking the troops that we're supporting . we need to create a coalition , sunni led coalition on the ground with our special operators to destroy isis and bring about stability . and you can't do that with assad in power . he has . . . 
christie and the fact is , i went back , it got done and here's . . . 
fiorina work better to lift everyone up , men and women . 
carson jake , jake . . . 
carson . . . them first . 
cruz fifty eight years ago , my father fled cuba . as he stood on the deck of that ferryboat with the wind and salt air blowing , he looked back at the oppression and torture he was escaping . and yet he looked forward to the promise of america . his story is our story . what ties americans together is we are all the children of those who risked everything for freedom . america is in crisis now . i believe in america . and if we get back to the free market principles and constitutional liberties that built this country , we can turn this country around . i believe that 2016 will be an election like 1980 , that we will win by following reagan's admonition to paint in bold colors , not pale pastels . we're building a grassroots army . i ask you to join us at tedcruz . org . and we , the people , can turn this nation around . 
kasich . . . if i become president because we'll have a constitutional amendment to require a federally balanced budget so they will do their job . 
trump well , i think these people always hit me with eminent domain , and frankly , i'm not in love with eminent domain . but eminent domain is something you need very strongly . when jeb had said , you used eminent domain privately for a parking lot . it wasn't for a parking lot . the state of new jersey too bad chris christie is not here , he could tell you the state of new jersey went to build a very large tower that was going to employ thousands of people . i mean , it was going to really do a big job in terms of economic development . now , just so you understand , i got hit very hard . it's private , it's private eminent domain . you understand that they took over a stadium in texas , and they used private eminent domain , but he just found that out after he made the charge . 
bush neil , my name was mentioned here . neil , my name was mentioned as well . here's the deal , chris is totally right . he's been a good governor , and he's a heck of a lot better than his predecessor that would have bankrupted new jersey . everybody on this stage is better than hillary clinton . and i think the focus ought to be on making sure that we leave this nomination process , as wild and woolly as it's going to be this is not being bad . these attack ads are going to be part of life . everybody just needs to get used to it . everybody's record's going to be scrutinized , and at the end of the day we need to unite behind the winner so we can defeat hillary clinton , because she is a disaster . our country rise up again , but we need to have a compelling conservative agenda that we present to the american people in a way that doesn't disparage people , that unites us around our common purpose . and so everybody needs to discount some of the things you're going to hear in these ads , and discount the the back and forth here , because every person here is better than hillary clinton . 
rubio you didn't want to go back , chris . 
paul . . . can i finish . . . 
bush i would . and i would do it in concert , again , with our arab allies and with europe , most particularly in this case . this is the lesson learned in history , if you bomb something and not do anything as it relates to deal with the aftermath of this , if you don't have a stable government , you get what we have in libya . and this is not leading from behind is not an effective policy . we have to lead . without the united states , nothing seems to work . europe doesn't have the ability to to to lead forward lead in this regard . and so dealing with the caliphate is important , because it now has spawned other areas . there have been 70 plus attacks in 17 countries , either inspired by isis or organized by isis , libya being the most important one now . we have to deal with the caliphate , with building a sunni army there , but we also have to deal with it in libya . and i think the united states , ultimately , is going to play play a significant role in this . the problem with the obama administration is that they see this incrementally . they're reluctant . they don't lead . no one knows whether we're serious , and when we do it , we do it in increments you can barely see . bell rings the united states has to lead in a much more aggressive way than we're doing right now . 
rubio . . . and the lines around the state . . . . every night . 
fiorina of this nation any differently than you managed the finances 
carson well , what i said , after we seal the borders , after we turn off the spigot that dispenses all the goodies so we don't have people coming in here , including employment , that people who had a pristine record , we should consider allowing them to become guest workers , primarily in the agricultural sphere , because that's the place where americans don't seem to want to work . that's what i said . and they have a six month period to do that . if they don't do it within that time period , then they become illegal , and as illegals , they will be treated as such . 
paul news flash , the republican party's been fighting against a single payer system . . . 
bush i'm not going to invite donald trump to the rally in charleston on monday afternoon when my brother is coming to speak . 
cruz well , listen donald knows that it was george w . bush who appointed john roberts . yes , it's true , i supported the republican nominee once he was made . but i would not have nominated john roberts . i would have nominated my former boss , mike luttig , who was the strongest proven conservative on the court of appeals . and i'll tell you , hugh . . . . . . you know , it's interesting now that donald promises that he will appoint justices who who will defend religious liberty , but this is a man who , for 40 years , has given money to jimmy carter , to joe biden , to hillary clinton , to chuck schumer , to harry reid . nobody who supports far left liberal democrats who are fighting for judicial activists can possibly care about having principled constitutionalists on the court . and what donald has told us is he will go to washington . . . bell ringing . . . and cut a deal . 
cruz we have kurds in both iraq and syria . they are fighting isis right now . they are winning victories right now . isis is using american military equipment they've seized in iraq . and the obama administration refuses to arm the kurds , the pesh merga , the fighting forces who have been longtime allies . we ought to be arming them and letting them fight . now , if we need to embed special forces to direct our overwhelming air power , if it is required to use ground troops to defeat isis , we should use them , but we ought to start with using our incredible air power advantage . the first persian gulf war , we launched 1 , 100 air attacks a day . today , we're launching between 15 and 30 . we're not using the tools we have , and it's because the commander in chief is not focused on defeating the enemy . 
kasich you know , tonight we hear about what people want to do . i want to tell you what i've done . i was a member of the armed services committee for 18 years . i spent a big chunk of my life studying national security issues and our role in the world . no . 2 . i was the chairman of the house budget committee and one of the chief architects the last time we balanced a budget , and it was the first time we had done it since man walked on the moon . we had a 5 trillion surplus and we cut taxes . i spent ten years in the private sector , actually learning how business works . and now i'm the governor of ohio , and i inherited a state that was on the brink timer sounds of dying . and we turned it all around with jobs and balanced budgets and rising credit and tax cuts , and the state is unified , and people have hope again in ohio . 
cruz well , we need to redefine our legal immigration system so that it meets the needs of the american economy . right now , we're bringing in far too many low skilled workers . what that is doing is driving down the wages of hard working americans . our system isn't working . and then on top of that , we've got a system that's allowing in millions of people to be here illegally . and the answer to that , i've laid out a very , very detailed immigration plan on my website . we're going to build a wall , triple the border patrol . we're going to end sanctuary cities . and let me tell you how we're going to do that . we're going to cut off federal taxpayer funds to any city that defies federal immigration laws . we're going to end welfare benefits for anyone who is here illegally . and the thing to understand , stephen , we can solve these problems . it's not that we don't know how to do it . it's that we're lacking the political will . neither of the parties in washington wants to do this . the democrats support illegal immigration because they view those illegal immigrants as potential voters and far too many of the republicans are doing the bidding of wall street and the special interest and they view it as cheap labor . we need instead leadership that works for the working men and women of this country . we need an immigration system that takes care of the jobs of the working men and women of this country . 
cruz well , as you know , at that same cnn forum , both marco and i were asked this question . his answer , he was on both sides of the fence . he's now agreeing with me . and so i'm glad . what i said is yes , apple should be forced to comply with this court order . why ? because under the fourth amendment , a search and seizure is reasonable if it has judicial authorization and probable cause . in this instance , the order is not put a back door in everyone's cell phone . if that was the order , that order would be problematic because it would compromise security and safety for everyone . i would agree with apple on that broad policy question . but on the question of unlocking this cell phone of a terrorist , we should enforce the court order and find out everyone that terrorist at san bernardino talked to on the phone , texted with , e mailed . and absolutely , apple doesn't have a right to defy a valid court order in a terrorism investigation . 
carson well , first of all , let me just address the iraq question . you know , i was not particularly in favor of us going to war in iraq , primarily because i have studied , you know , the middle east , recognizing that those are nations that are ruled by dictators and have been for thousands of years . and when you go in and you remove one of those dictators , unless you have an appropriate plan for replacing them , you're going to have chaos . now , fortunately , we were able to stabilize the situation , and it was the current administration that turned tail and ran and destabilized the situation . now , having said that , in terms of the rules of engagement , i was talking about , you know , obama has said , you know , we shouldn't bomb tankers , you know , coming out of refineries because there may be people in there , or because the environment may be hurt . you know , that's just asinine thinking . and the fact of the matter is . . . you know , we obviously , you're not going to accomplish all of your goals without some collateral damage . you have to be able to assess what is acceptable and what is not . 
trump so , they can kill us , but we can't kill them ? that's what you're saying . and as far as the internet is concerned , we're not talking about closing the internet . i'm talking about parts of syria , parts of iraq , where isis is , spotting it . now , you could close it . what i like even better than that is getting our smartest and getting our best to infiltrate their internet , so that we know exactly where they're going , exactly where they're going to be . i like that better . but we have to who would be i just can't imagine somebody booing . these are people that want to kill us , folks , and you're you're objecting to us infiltrating their conversations ? i don't think so . i don't think so . 
trump right . 
rubio well , i think you ask a very important question , because the issue here the next president of the united states has to fill this vacancy . justice scalia in the history of the republic , there has never been anyone better than him at standing for the principle that the constitution is not a living and breathing document it is supposed to be applied as originally meant . and the next president of the united states has to be someone that you can trust and believe in to appoint someone just as good as scalia plus there may be at least two other vacancies . so you ask mr . trump to respond and say that he would , and he says that he would . but the bottom line is , if you look at his record over the last 25 or 30 years , on issue after issue , he has not been on our side . now , if he's changed , we're always looking for converts into the conservative movement . but the bottom line is that , if you don't have a record there to look at and say , i feel at peace that when donald trump is president of the united states , he's going to be firmly on our side on these issues . in fact , very recently , he was still defending planned parenthood . he says he's not going to take sides in the palestinians versus israel . these are concerning things . and so , yes , i have a doubt about whether donald trump , if he becomes president , will replace justice scalia with someone just like justice scalia . 
paul these are the fundamental questions of our time , these foreign policy questions , whether or not regime change is a good idea or a bad idea . i don't think because i think the regime change was a bad idea it means that hussein was necessarily a good idea . there is often variations of evil on both sides of the war . what we have to decide is whether or not regime change is a good idea . it's what the neoconservatives have wanted . it's what the vast majority of those on the stage want . they still want regime change . they want it in syria . they wanted it in iraq . they want it in libya . it has not worked . out of regime change you get chaos . from the chaos you have seen repeatedly the rise of radical islam . so we get this profession of , oh , my goodness , they want to do something about terrorism and yet they're the problem because they allow terrorism to arise out of that chaos . 
paul you know , i left my medical practice and ran for office because i was concerned about an 18 trillion debt . we borrow a million dollars a minute . now , on the floor of the congress , the washington establishment from both parties puts forward a bill that will explode the deficit . it allows president obama to borrow unlimited amounts of money . i will stand firm . i will spend every ounce of energy to stop it . i will begin tomorrow to filibuster it . and i ask everyone in america to call congress tomorrow and say enough is enough ; no more debt . 
rubio yeah , but that because the math is , if you 5 percent of a million is a lot more than 5 percent of a thousand . so yeah , someone who makes more money . . . 
trump the tpp is horrible deal . it is a deal that is going to lead to nothing but trouble . it's a deal that was designed for china to come in , as they always do , through the back door and totally take advantage of everyone . it's 5 , 600 pages long . so complex that nobodies read it . it's like obamacare ; nobody ever read it . they passed it ; nobody read it . and look at mess we have right now . and it will be repealed . but this is one of the worst trade deals . and i would , yes , rather not have it . with all of these countries , and all of the bad ones getting advantage and taking advantage of what the good ones would normally get , i'd rather make individual deals with individual countries . we will do much better . we lose a fortune on trade . the united states loses with everybody . we're losing now over 500 billion in terms of imbalance with china , 75 billion a year imbalance with japan . by the way , mexico , 50 billion a year imbalance . so i must say , gerard , i just think it's a terrible deal . i love trade . i'm a free trader , 100 percent . but we need smart people making the deals , and we don't have smart people making the deals . 
paul hey , look , look ! he's already hedging his bet on the clintons , ok ? so if he doesn't run as a republican , maybe he supports clinton , or maybe he runs as an independent . . . 
perry i will tell you one thing i would whole lot rather had carly fiorina over there doing our negotiation than john kerry . maybe we would've gotten a deal where we didn't give everything away . but the issue for us is to have a congress that stands up and says not only no , but hell no , to this money going to a regime that is going to use it for terror . . . video clip ends video clip begins 
christie sure . first , let's remember something . every morning when a united states senator wakes up , they think about what kind of speech can i give or what kind of bill can i drop ? every morning , when i wake up , i think about what kind of problem do i need to solve for the people who actually elected me ? it's a different experience , it's a much different experience . and the fact is , marco , you shouldn't compare yourself to joe biden and you shouldn't say that that's what we're doing . here is exactly what we're doing . you have not be involved in a consequential decision where you had to be held accountable . you just simply haven't . and the fact is the fact when you talk about the hezbollah sanctions act that you list as one of your accomplishments you just did , you weren't even there to vote for it . that's not leadership , that's truancy . and the fact is that what we need to do what we need to have in this country is not to make the same mistake we made eight years ago . the fact is it does matter when you have to make decisions and be held accountable for them . it does matter when the challenges don't come on a list of a piece of paper of what to vote yes or no every day , but when the problems come in from the people that you serve . i like marco rubio , and he's a smart person and a good guy , but he simply does not have the experience to be president of the united states and make these decisions . we've watched it happen , everybody . for the last seven years , the people of new hampshire are smart . do not make the same mistake again . 
rubio do i get another 30 seconds ? he mentioned me . 
christie carl , are we really talking about getting government involved in fantasy football ? laughter we have wait a second , we have 19 trillion in debt . we have people out of work . we have isis and al qaeda attacking us . and we're talking about fantasy football ? can we stop ? how about this ? how about we get the government to do what they're supposed to be doing , secure our borders , protect our people , and support american values and american families . enough on fantasy football . let people play , who cares ? crosstalk 
cruz but you're not beating hillary . you're not beating hillary . 
bush inaudible 
cruz you know , everyone here talks about the need to take on washington . the natural next question is who actually has done so . who actually has stood up not just to democrats , but to leaders in our own party ? when millions of americans rose up against obamacare , i was proud to lead that fight . when millions of americans rose up against amnesty , i was proud to lead that fight . when millions of americans rose up against planned parenthood , i was proud to lead that fight . if people are promising they're going to take on washington and cronyism , you need to look to who has been doing it . in my family , my dad fled oppression in cuba to come to america . freedom is personal for me , and i will always keep my word and fight for freedom . 
kasich well , jake , i grew up in a blue collar family . and the simple fact of the matter is that of course we're sensitive about trade . one out of five americans works in a job connected to trade ; 38 million americans are connected to it . but my position has always been we want to have free trade , but fair trade . and i've been arguing all along that it is absolutely critical that when other countries break those agreements , we don't turn the process over to some international bureaucrat who comes back a couple years later and says , oh , america was right , and people are out of work . the fact of the matter is we have to have an expedited process . when people cheat , when countries cheat and they take advantage of us , we need to blow the whistle . and as president of the united states , i absolutely will blow the whistle and begin to stand up for the american worker . but we don't want to lock the doors and pull down the blinds and leave the world . because frankly , if we do that , prices will go up . people will buy less . other people will be out of work . and we don't want to see that happen . trade , though , has to be balanced and we have to make sure that when we see a violation , like some country dumping their products into this country , believe me as president , i will stand up and i will shut down those imports because they're a violation of the agreement we have and the american worker expects us to stand up . and jake , my family worked in the steel industry , not with a white collar . i understand their plight . 
trump the world trade center came down during your brother's reign , remember that . booing 
trump and that's all i'm saying , jake . that's all i'm saying . 
cruz if we've got to win this election , and we can't do it with a candidate who agrees with hillary clinton and can't take it to her and beat her on the debate stage and at the polls . 
rubio . . . what's your plan . . . 
walker jake , this is this is this is . . . 
kasich let me let me also say , gary gary , let me also say , jeb is what jeb is talking about with the big banks is to force them to reserve their capital , people who invest it and they hold their capital , so that if the bank goes down , the people who are invested in the bank are the ones that pay . that's what he's trying to say . secondly , i'll tell you about wall street there's too much greed . and the fact is , a free enterprise system is a system that's produced the greatest wealth for the world . but you know michael novak , the great catholic theologian , says that a free enterprise system that is not underlaid with values and we should all think about the way we conduct our lives yes , free enterprise is great , profits are great , but there have to be some values that underlay it , and they need a good ethics lesson on wall street on a regular basis to keep them in check so we , the people , do not lose . 
kasich no , i wouldn't . listen , i think the problem with the administration , if you talk to our friends around the world , they say what is america doing ? you know , you don't support us , we can't figure out where you are . you won't arm the freedom fighters in ukraine , we let the russians trump up some excuse in the business of russian speaking people . you had a red line in syria . you walked away from it . you refused to fund the syrian rebels , you undercut egypt and we ended up with the muslim brotherhood for awhile . and then we turn our back on netanyahu when he comes to congress to talk about his concerns of the iranian deal . look , i know in human nature sometimes there's a sense that you make better with your enemies than you do with your friends . and you know what happens when you do that ? you make a terrible mistake . you need to support your friends , you need to hold your enemies out here . . . . . . and you need to negotiate tough deals . the fact is , they need to understand who we are . the chinese understand . they don't own the south china sea . they have to stop hacking everything we have in this country or we'll take out their systems . we will arm the ukrainians so they have lethal defensive aid . we will destroy isis and mr . putin , you better understand , you're either with us or you're against us . we're not rattling a sword . you're not our enemy but we're not going to put up with this nonsense any longer . and a strong america is what the entire world is begging for . where has america gone is what many of our allies say around the world . bell rings when i'm president , they're going to know exactly where we are because we're coming back . 
trump thank you . i began this journey six months ago . my total focus was on building up our military , building up our strength , building up our borders , making sure that china , japan , mexico , both at the border and in trade , no longer takes advantage of our country . certainly would never have made that horrible , disgusting , absolutely incompetent deal with iran where they get 150 billion . they're a terrorist nation . but i began it talking about other things . and those things are things that i'm very good at and maybe that's why i'm center stage . people saw it . people liked it . people respected it . a month ago things changed . radical islamic terrorism came into effect even more so than it has been in the past . people like what i say . people respect what i say . and we've opened up a very big discussion that needed to be opened up . thank you very much . 
trump thank you . 
paul i oppose the iranian deal , and will vote against it . i don't think that the president negotiated from a position of strength , but i don't immediately discount negotiations . i'm a reagan conservative . reagan did negotiate with the soviets . but you have to negotiate from a position of strength , and i think president obama gave away too much , too early . if there's going to be a negotiation , you're going to have to believe somehow that the iranians are going to comply . and i asked this question to john kerry , i said do you believe they're trustworthy ? and he said no . and i said , well , how are we gonna get them to comply ? i would have never released the sanctions before there was consistent evidence of compliance . 
bush i think the dysfunction in washington is really dangerous , that's what i think . and we need a proven leader that has a record of solving problems , someone who doesn't cut and run ; someone who could be a commander in chief to unite our country around common purposes ; someone who doesn't disparage people . someone that doesn't brag , for example , that he has been bankrupt four times and it was great , because he could use the legal system . someone . . . 
trump now , all of a sudden everybody's saying , take the oil . it wasn't so fashionable to take the oil six months ago . i've been saying it for years . 
rubio ok . a skeptic . you can measure the climate . you can measure it . that's not the issue we're discussing . here is what i'm skeptical of . i'm skeptical of the decisions that the left wants us to make , because i know the impact those are going to have and they're all going to be on our economy . they will not do a thing to lower the rise of the sea . they will not do a thing to cure the drought here in california . but what they will do is they will make america a more expensive place to create jobs . and today with millions of people watching this broadcast that are struggling paycheck to paycheck that do not know how they're going to pay their bills at the end of this month , i'm not in favor of anything that is going to make it harder for them to raise their family . crosstalk 
kasich well , you know , david , i i've just spent a lot of time here in this state , as i mentioned earlier , and we have to have practical solutions , just like we were just talking about a few minutes ago on north korea . look , the situation is , we need to finish the border . it has to be completed . just like we lock our doors at night , the country has to be able to lock its doors . and we can have a guest worker program , where people can come in and out in an orderly way . and then for the 11 . 5 million that are here , if they have not committed a crime since they've been here , i believe they ought to pay some back taxes , pay a fine , never get on the path to citizenship , but get legalization . it is not i couldn't even imagine how we would even begin to think about taking a mom or a dad out of a house when they have not committed a crime since they've been here , leaving their children in the house . i mean , that is not , in my opinion , the kind of values that we believe in . and secondly , i think at the end of the day , that americans would support a plan like this . i think congress would pass a plan to finish the border , guest worker , pay a fine , a path to legalization , and not citizenship . and we've got to get this done . and i will tell you this , within the first 100 days that i am president , i will put that proposal to the congress . and i will tell you , as a former congressman , and an executive , in ohio , i can promise you that i believe you'll get the votes to pass that , and we can move on with that issue and protect our border . that's what i think . 
bush he was talking about me . 
trump this wasn't on the subject . 
cruz . . . he's going to look to cut a deal , rather than fight for someone who won't cut a deal on the constitution , but will defend it faithfully . 
rubio well , you know , that's an excellent question , because what we are going through in this country is not simply an economic downturn . we are living through a massive economic transformation . i mean , this economy is nothing like what it was like five years ago , not to mention 15 or 20 years ago . and it isn't just a different economy . it's changing faster than ever . you know , it took the telephone 75 years to reach 100 million users . it took candy crush one year to reach some 100 million users . laughter so the world is changing faster than ever , and it is disruptive . number one , we are in a global competition now , and several of the candidates have said that . there are now dozens of developed economies on this planet that we have to compete with . and we lose that competition because we have the highest business tax rate in the industrialized world , because we have regulations that continue to grow by the billions every single week , because we have a crazy health care law that discourages companies from hiring people , but because we're not fully utilizing our energy resources , that if we did , it would bring back all kinds of growth , especially in manufacturing , and because we have an outdated higher education system . our higher education system is completely outdated . it is too expensive , too hard to access , and it doesn't teach 21st century skills . if we do what needs to be done tax reform , regulatory reform , fully utilize our energy resources , repeal and replace obamacare , and modernize higher education , then we can grasp the potential and the promise of this new economy . and we won't just save the american dream . we will expand it to reach more people and change more lives than ever before . and then truly this new century can be a new american century . 
trump right . dynamically . 
trump . . . we're supporting troops that we don't even know who they are . . . 
trump ok , fine . 
trump i believe that i will get along we will do between that , ukraine , all of the other problems , we won't have the kind of problems that our country has right now with russia and many other nations . 
trump even if it's not me ? laughter let me just start off by saying . . . 
fiorina not twice , four times , a record four times . why should we trust you to manage the finances 
kasich of course . 
kasich no , i don't think it is . and i want to go back to two other issues . one is the metadata . we know we have to hold this data for a longer period of time . and , you know , in a lot of ways , chris is right . look , what a president has to do is take a position . we don't want to err on the side of having less . we want to err on the side of having more . that's good for our families . in addition to that , wolf , there is a big problem . it's called encryption . and the people in san bernardino were communicating with people who the fbi had been watching . but because their phone was encrypted , because the intelligence officials could not see who they were talking to , it was lost . we have to solve the encryption problem . it is not easy . a president of the united states , again , has to bring people together , have a position . we need to be able to penetrate these people when they are involved in these plots and these plans . and we have to give the local authorities the ability to penetrate to disrupt . that's what we need to do . encryption is a major problem , and congress has got to deal with this and so does the president to keep us safe . 
cruz . . . what he said on national television , donald yells liar . let me tell you something falsely accusing someone of lying is itself a lie . . . 
kasich well , it's probably not , maybe , legal , but , i would pick mother theresa , the lady that i had a chance to meet , a woman who lived a life so much bigger than her own . an inspiration to everyone when we think about our responsibility to love our neighbor as we love ourselves . 
kasich jake 
trump if you don't mind , rand you know , you are on last you do have your 1 percent . i would like and i think it's very important . i think it's important , because it's about judgment . it's about judgment . i didn't want to go into iraq , and i fought it , because what i said what i said . . . 
huckabee no , i don't think he's on the wrong side of such an issue . jeb is a friend . i'm not up here to fight with jeb or to fight with anybody else . but i am here to fight for somebody who is a county clerk elected under the kentucky constitution that 75 percent of the people of that state had voted for that said that marriage was between a man and a woman . the supreme court in a very , very divided decision decided out of thin air that they were just going to redefine marriage . it's a decision that the other justices in dissent said they didn't have and there wasn't a constitutional shred of capacity for them to do it . i thought that everybody here passed ninth grade civics . the courts cannot legislate . that's what roberts said . but heck , it's what we learned in civics . the courts can't make a law . they can interpret one . they can review one . they can't implement it . they can't force it . but here's what happened because the courts just decided that something was going to be and people relinquished it and the other two branches of government sat by silently i thought we had three branches of government , they were all equal to each other , we have separation of powers , and we have checks and balances . if the court can just make a decision and we just all surrender to it , we have what jefferson said was judicial tyranny . the reason that this is a real issue that we need to think about . . . 
rubio i do . a couple of points . the first is , i'm concerned about violence in general in this society . and by the way , the first people that are facing that violence are our law enforcement officers . and they deserve our respect and they deserve our thanks for everything they do for us . on the issue of anger . yes , people are angry . of course they're angry . every institution in america has been failing us for the better part of 20 years or 30 years . but leadership is not about using the anger , leadership is about using the anger to motivate us , not to define us . but to motivate us to take action . being here in miami is special . my grandfather lived with us most of his life while i was growing up . and he would sit on the porch of our home and tell me all kinds of stories and things i learned about history . my grandfather was born in 1899 before there were airplanes in the sky . one night in the summer of 1969 , he watched a man set foot on the moon . bell rings you know what he said when he saw that ? he said americans can do anything . americans can do anything . there is no problem before us we cannot solve and we can solve it if we come together in a serious way , in this generation . 
trump no no . . . laughter . . . i think if it doesn't . . . i like that . i like it . i'd consider it . but i think i'll go back to building buildings if it doesn't work out . 
huckabee and , the only way no . . . crosstalk 
bush so they soybean sales from iowa , entire soybean production goes the equivalent of it goes to china . or how about boeing right here within a mile ? do you think that the chinese , if they had a 45 percent tariff imposed on all their imports wouldn't retaliate and start buying airbus ? of course , they would . this would be devastating for the economy . we need someone with a steady hand being president of the united states . 
trump . . . inaudible 
trump excuse me , what am i saying ? out of hundreds of deals that i've done , hundreds , on four occasions i've taken advantage of the laws of this country , like other people . i'm not going to name their names because i'm not going to embarrass , but virtually every person that you read about on the front page of the business sections , they've used the law . the difference is , when somebody else uses those laws , nobody writes about it . when i use it , they say , trump , trump , trump . the fact is , i built a net worth of more than 10 billion . i have a great , great company . i employ thousands of people . and i'm very proud of the job i did . again chris , hundreds and hundreds of deals . four times , i've taken advantage of the laws . and frankly , so has everybody else in my position . 
kasich jeb mentioned me . time for me to go again . 
bush and it's and we need . . . laughter . . . to have a leader that is . . . crosstalk 
cruz . . . i don't want a supreme court justice that you cut a deal with harry reid to undermine religious liberty , because that same justice will also erase the second amendment from the bill of rights . 
trump maria maria , what you were talking about just now is called corporate inversion . it's one of the biggest problems our country has . right now , corporations , by the thousands , are thinking of leaving our country with the jobs leave them behind . they're leaving because of taxes , but they are also leaving because they can't get their money back and everybody agrees , democrats and republicans , that is should come back in . but they can't get along . they can't even make a deal . here is the case , they both agree , they can't make a deal . we have to do something . corporate inversion is one of the biggest problems we have . so many companies are going to leave our country . 
trump they lied . they said there were weapons of mass destruction ; there were none . and they knew there were none . i don't know if he lied or not . he could have lied . maybe he did . maybe he didn't . i guess you'd have to ask him . end video clip 
trump i think maybe my greatest weakness is that i trust people too much . i'm too trusting . and when they let me down , if they let me down , i never forgive . i find it very , very hard to forgive people that deceived me . so i don't know if you would call that a weakness , but my wife said let up . laughter 
kasich josh ? 
rubio you know , if i may respond . . . 
paul i want to collect more records from terrorists , but less records from innocent americans . the fourth amendment was what we fought the revolution over ! john adams said it was the spark that led to our war for independence , and i'm proud of standing for the bill of rights , and i will continue to stand for the bill of rights . 
rubio that my point that i made was you had criticized mitt romney for self deportation . you said that his strategy of self deportation is why he lost the election . and i think people in florida would be surprised , because , in fact , the article that was today , they interviewed a number of people that would have been willing to do those jobs , if you would have been willing to hire them to do it . 
trump i know politicians i know politicians , believe it or not , better than you do . and it's not good . 
fiorina we have been talking about this . . . 
trump department of education . we're cutting common core . we're getting rid of common core . we're bringing education locally . department of environmental protection . we are going to get rid are of it in almost every form . we're going to have little tidbits left but we're going to take a tremendous amount out . we have various other things . if you look at the irs , if you look at every single agency , we can cut it down , and i mean really cut it down and save . the waste , fraud , and abuse is massive . larry kudlow , great guy , everybody respects him , said my plan for taxes and tax cutting is the best by far of everybody . 
cruz i think that is an assessment the voters are going to make . and they are going to make it of each and everyone of us . they are going to assess who is level headed , who has clear vision , who has judgment , who can confront our enemies , who can confront the threats we face in this country , and who can have the judgment when to engage and when not to engage both are incredibly important for a commander in chief , knowing how to go after our enemies . in the case of iran , for example , who has the clarity of vision to understand that the ayatollah khamenei , when he chants , death to america , he means it . we need a president with the judgment and resolve to keep this country safe from radical islamic terrorists . 
walker . . . i'm going to sign an order that makes the congress live by the same rules as everybody else . 
trump . . . wait a minute , and these people may even be tougher than chris christie . ok ? 
kasich yeah . well , first of all , those numbers , incorrect . we are our medicaid programs are coming in below cost estimates , and our medicaid program in the second year grew at 2 . 5 percent . and kimberley , let me tell you , when we expand medicaid and we treat the mentally ill , then they don't live under a bridge or live in a prison , where they cost 22 , 500 a year . when we take the drug addicted and we treat them in the prisons , we stop the revolving door of people in and out of prisons , and we save 22 , 500 a year . guess what else ? they get their lives back . and the working poor , they're now getting health care . and you know that about a third of the people who are now getting that health care are people who are suffering very serious illnesses , particularly cancer . so , what i would tell you is , we've gone from an 8 billion hole to a 2 billion surplus . we've cut taxes by more than any governor in america by 5 billion . we have grown the number of jobs by 400 , 000 private sector jobs since i've been governor . our credit is strong . our pensions are strong . and frankly , we leave no one behind . economic growth is not an end unto itself . we want everyone to rise , and we will make them personally responsible for the help that they get . and that is exactly the program we're driving in ohio . and , boy , people ought to look at ohio , because it has got a good formula . 
rubio well , i believe that there are abuses , those companies should be permanently barred from ever using the program again and we should put strict standards in place to ensure that they're not being abused , like the prevailing wage requirement and like the advertising requirement . 
trump i want security for this country . ok ? i want security . i'm tired of seeing what's going on , between the border where the people flow over ; people come in ; they live ; they shoot . i want security for this country . we have a serious problem with , as you know , with radical islam . we have a tremendous problem . it's not only a problem here . it's a problem all over the world . i want to find out why those two young people those two horrible young people in california when they shot the 14 people , killed them people they knew , people that held the wedding reception for them . i want to find out many people saw pipe bombs and all sorts of things all over their apartment . why weren't they vigilant ? why didn't they call ? why didn't they call the police ? and by the way , the police are the most mistreated people in this country . i will tell you that . the most mistreated people . in fact , we need to wait a minute we need vigilance . we have to find out many people knew about what was going on . why didn't they turn those two people in so that you wouldn't have had all the death ? there's something going on and it's bad . and i'm saying we have to get to the bottom of it . that's all i'm saying . we need security . 
fiorina i didn't say i would cut off all communication with putin . what i said was as president of the united states , now is not the time to talk with him . reagan walked away at reykjavik . there is a time and a place for everything . there is a time and a place for talk . and there is a time and a place for action . i know vladimir putin . he respects strength . he lied to our president's face ; didn't both to tell him about warplanes and troops going into syria . we need to speak to him from a position of strength . so as commander in chief , i will not speak to him until we've set up that no fly zone ; until we've gathered our sunni arab allies and begun to deny isis territory ; until i've called the supreme leader of iran and told him new deal new deal . we the united states of america are going to cut off the money flow , which we can do ; which we don't need anyone's permission or collaboration to do . and i will not speak to him personally until we've rebuilt the 6th fleet a little bit right under his nose ; rebuilt the missile defense program in poland right under his nose ; and conducted a few military exercises in the baltic states . and let us remember one other thing . hillary clinton and barack obama are responsible for the growth of isis because they precipitously withdrew from iraq in 2011 against the advice of every single general and for political expediency . it's not these people up here . it's hillary clinton . 
trump . . . oh , yeah , yeah . . . 
christie no , he's not lying , he's just wrong . i mean , so , there's a difference i'm the only guy on this stage who's put out a detailed , 12 point plan on entitlement reform and here's why because 71 of federal spending right now is on entitlements , and debt service , 71 . and we have spent the last hour and five minutes talking about the other 29 , and no time on the 71 , and that makes no sense . now , let me tell you exactly what we would do on social security . yes , we'd raise the retirement age two years , and phase it in over 25 years , that means we'd raise it one month a year for 25 years when we're all living longer , and living better lives . secondly , we would means test social security for those who are making over 200 , 000 dollars a year in retirement income , and have 4 to 5 million dollars in liquid assets saved . they don't need that social security check . social security is meant to be to make sure that no one who's worked hard , and played by the rules , and paid into the system grows old in poverty in america . if we don't deal with this problem , it will bankrupt our country , or lead to massive tax increases , neither one that we want in this country . 
bush look , i won the lottery when i was born 63 years ago , looked up , and i saw my mom . my mom is the strongest woman i know . 
trump i know , but why did you say it ? i heard it myself . why did you say it ? 
rubio the issue of poverty is critical , because for me , poverty is the is is free enterprise not reaching people . today , we have antipoverty programs that don't cure poverty . we don't cure poverty in america . our antipoverty programs have become , in some instances , a way of life , a lifestyle . now , we do need antipoverty programs , you can't have free enterprise programs without them , but not as a way of life . and so i have a very specific proposal on this and i don't in 60 seconds , i can't describe it all , but it basically turns the program over to states . it allows states to design innovative programs that cure poverty , because i think nikki haley will do a better job curing poverty than barack obama . 
carson i want to say something about this , because i'm not here just to add beauty to the stage . laughter you know , i've been talking about libya for quite a long time . i think i was the first one to start talking about it because i say we have to have a proactive foreign policy strategy . and of course , the next place that isis is going to attack to is libya . if you want to expand your caliphate and increase your influence , then you're going to go to a place that's strategically located . you go north , across the mediterranean . you're into southern europe . you go south , you're into chad and sudan and niger . not to mention the fact that you have much more oil than you do in iraq . that's the kind of place that they're going to go to , therefore , we need to be thinking about how do we prevent them from tacking over there . they're already sending their fighters there , we need to be consulting with our military experts and asking them what do they need in order to prevent isis from being able to take over libya . that's going to have enormous concede for us . 
rubio well , first , let me say i think god has blessed us . he has blessed the republican party with some very good candidates . the democrats can't even find one . laughter cheering and applause and i believe god has blessed our country . this country has been extraordinarily blessed . and we have honored that blessing . and that's why god has continued to bless us . and he has blessed us with young men and women willing to risk their lives and sometimes die in uniform for the safety and security of our people . unfortunately today we have a va that does not do enough for them . i am proud that last year we helped change the law . we changed the law to give the power to the va secretary the ability to fire any executive that isn't doing their job . and it is outrageous they've only fired one person to date . when i'm president of the united states , we're going to have a va that cares more about our veterans than about the bureaucrats who work at the va . cheering and applause 
trump and by the way , the laws were totally different . that was a whole different world . 
rubio well , that's why we have a debate . i think that we should have a deeper debate about these issues , because there is no more important decision that a president will make . 
kasich let but let me let me just tell you . first of all , we have the lowest number of state employees in 30 years . secondly , we have grown government at the rate of inflation . and i went from an 8 billion hole to a 2 billion surplus . and we've grown jobs by 400 , 000 that's one of the fastest growing states in the country . our pensions are secure and our credit is rock solid . now , i've learned that , what makes things work , what gets the economy going , not just in ohio , but in washington and it's three things . common sense regulations , which we have , lower taxes , which we have , the lowest taxes , tax cuts in the country . and thirdly , a fiscal plan to balance the budget . when you go from 8 billion in the hole to 2 billion in the black , when you cut taxes by 5 billion and you grow over 400 , 000 jobs , that is a record that i can take to washington , using the same formula that i used in washington when i was part of the effort to balance the budget to give us a surplus and to create jobs . 
rubio well , let me talk about poverty . 
rubio in fact , some of the people . . . crosstalk 
christie can i can i be really can i be really clear on this , because i am the father of two daughters . one of them is here tonight . what my wife and i have taught our daughters right from the beginning , that their sense of self worth , their sense of value , their sense of what they want to do with their life comes not from the outside , but comes from within . and if a young woman in this country wants to go and fight to defend their country , she should be permitted to do so . part of that also needs to be part of a greater effort in this country , and so there's no reason why one young women should be discriminated against from registering for the selective service . the fact is , we need to be a party and a people that makes sure that our women in this country understand anything they can dream , anything that they want to aspire to , they can do . that's the way we raised our daughters and that's what we should aspire to as president for all of the women in our country . 
bush i think there needs to be accommodation for someone acting on faith . religious conscience is is is a first freedom . it's it's a powerful part of our of our bill of rights . and , in a big , tolerant country , we should respect the rule of law , allow people in in in this country i'm a i was opposed to the decision , but we you can't just say , well , they gays can't get married now . but this woman , there should be some accommodation for her conscience , just as there should be for people that are florists that don't want to participate in weddings , or bakers . a great country like us should find a way to have accommodations for people so that we can solve the problem in the right way . this should be solved at the local level . . . 
trump you you don't . . . 
rubio no , i've never there has been , for example , today , according to the changes harry reid made , appellate judges can now be appointed by a simple majority , but not supreme court justices . and i think today you see the wisdom of why we don't want that to change . because if that were the case and we were not in charge of the senate , harry reid and barack obama would ram down our throat a liberal justice , like the ones barack obama has imposed on us already . 
trump not what you say in the op ed . 
kasich i'm the only person on this stage that actually was involved in the chief architect of balancing the federal budget . you can't do it with empty promised . you know , these plans would put us trillions and trillions of dollars in debt . i actually have a plan . i'm the only one on this stage that has a plan that would create jobs , cut taxes , balance the budget and can get it done because i'm realistic . you just don't make promises like this . why don't we just give a chicken in every pot , while we're , you know , coming up coming up with these fantasy tax schemes . we'll just clean it up . where are you gonna clean it up ? you have to deal with entitlements , you have to be in a position to control discretionary spending . you gotta be creative and imaginative . now , let me just be clear , john . i went into ohio where we had an 8 billion hole and now we have a 2 billion surplus . we're up 347 , 000 jobs . when i was in washington , i fought to get the budget balanced . i was the architect . it was the first time we did it since man walked on the moon . we cut taxes and we had a 5 trillion projected surplus when i left . that's was hard work . fiscal discipline , know what you're doing . creativity . this stuff is fantasy . just like getting rid of medicare and medicaid . come on , that's just not you scare senior citizens with that . it's not responsible . 
trump i know you're trying to build up your energy , jeb , but it's not working very well . laughter 
fiorina they do not need to be forced . they need to be asked to bring the best and brightest , the most recent technology to the table . i was asked as a ceo . i complied happily . and they will as well . but they have not been asked . that's why it cost billions of dollars to build an obama website that failed because the private sector wasn't asked . 
trump well , look , my response is very simple . there is nobody on this stage that has done more for israel than i have . nobody . you might say , you might talk , you're politicians , all talk , no action . i've been watching it all my life . you are all talk and no action . 
cruz because because donald's mother was born in scotland . she was naturalized . now , donald . . . 
trump you said you're going to cut funding for women's health . you said it . 
cruz i will let donald speak for himself . but i will say , there's a reason , in my campaign i've laid out a very , very specific spend and cut plan , 500 billion . i've specified five major agencies that i would eliminate , 25 programs . and dana , you know why political candidates don't do that ? because when you do that , the lobbyists attack you . when you specify the programs you would eliminate , then you get attacked . let's talk for example back in iowa the first primary . when i went to iowa and campaigned against ethanol mandates , everyone said that was political suicide . you can't take on ethanol in iowa . and my opponents on this stage not only didn't do the same . they attacked me and even promised to expand corporate welfare . bell rings if we're going to stop bankrupting our kids and grandkids , you've got to be willing to take on the lobbyists , which means not just some fanciful waste , fraud and abuse , but specifying these are the programs i'll eliminate so that we can take care of the hard working taxpayer . 
trump mitt romney . . . crosstalk . . . false , totally false . and now the funny thing is he didn't talk about the hundreds of really successful jobs , the buildings all over the world that have made a fortune . crosstalk 
carson ok . we have a system of taxation in this country that is horribly wrong . you know , i never had an audit until i spoke at the national prayer breakfast , and then all of a sudden , they came in , they said we just want to look at your real estate dealings . and then they didn't find anything , so they said let's look at the whole year . and they didn't find anything , so they said let's look at the next year and the next year . they didn't find anything and they won't find anything because i'm a very honest person . but he fact of the matter is the irs is not honest and we need to get rid of them . and as far as israel is concerned , you know , when i was there several months ago , i talked to a lot of people . i couldn't find a single one who didn't think that we had turned our backs on israel . you know , they are a strategic partner for us but also recognize that we have a judeo christian foundation , and the last thing we need to do is to reject israel . it doesn't mean that we can't be fair to other people . we can always be fair to other people , but , you know , it's like when you have a child , you know , you want to be fair to all the children around but you have a special attention for your own child . and now , as far as north korea is concerned , you know , kim jung un is an unstable person , but he does understand strength . and i think we have to present strength to him . we should be encouraging the alliance with japan and south korea . we should be encouraging the placement of the thaad , the terminal high altitude area defense , that seems to disturb not only the north koreans but the chinese as well . and we also need to have a much more robust naval presence in that area , and i think we need to be developing strategic defense initiative because this man is going to have long range missiles , he is going to have nuclear capabilities . we need to be able to defend ourselves . and lastly , we should make sure that he knows that if he ever shoots a missile at us , it will be the last thing he ever does . 
trump it's just a minor case . it's a minor case . 
paul if i was mentioned in the question , can i respond ? 
cruz i did not nominate john roberts . i would not have nominated john roberts . 
christie of course i would . as a former united states attorney who spent seven years of my life fighting this on the streets of my state , i would do that . but we need to do more . and let me tell you what we've done in new jersey , josh . we are working with the folks in new hampshire in their legislature right now to show them how we're helping to solve this problem in new jersey . not just for this campaign three years ago , i proposed a law that we signed into effect , which said that anyone who was a non violent , non dealing , first time drug offender no longer goes to prison in new jersey . they go to mandatory , in patient drug treatment . what has happened is , crime has gone down 20 percent in those years . the prison population has gone down 10 percent . we've now closed the state prison closed a state prison , and we're turning it into a drug rehabilitation facility , so people can get the tools they need . listen , everyone out there knows this in new hampshire . this is a disease . it's not a moral failing , it's a disease . and we need to get people the treatment they need . and let me tell you why . because i'm pro life . and i'm pro life not just for the nine months in the womb , i'm pro life for when they get out and it's a lot more complicated . sixteen year old , heroin addicted drug girl on the floor of the county lockup , i'm pro life for her life . the 42 year old lawyer who is taking oxycontin and can't get out of bed and support his family i'm pro life for his life . everyone of those lives is an individual gift from god . and the last thing is this . these efforts we've taken over the last three years , 2015 in new jersey , for the first time in four years , drug overdose deaths have gone down , not up . i'll bring the same solutions to the country . 
carson i just want to thank all my colleagues here for being civil , and not falling for the traps . and , i also just want to thank the audience for being attentive , and noticing the questions , and the noticing the answers . and , this is what i am finding throughout america . people are waking up because it is going to be us who will determine the direction of our country . and , it was made for we the people , we are the ones who decide who we are , and we should never give away the values and principles that made america into a great nation for the sake of political correctness . 
rubio since i've been mentioned , can i respond ? crosstalk 
bush it's very different . transmission lines , pipe lines , bridges and highways . all of that is proper use of imminent domain . not to take an elderly woman's home to build a parking lot so that high rollers can come from new york city to build casinos in atlantic city . 
bush i'd like can i can i . . . 
paul get a warrant ! 
trump . . . the only reason that is was a d was because we didn't care we didn't give them the information . . . 
huckabee that if it's not reserved in the constitution , then the 10th amendment says it's left to the states . but somebody forgot to send a memo to washington . 
trump . . . spend a little more money on the commercials . . . 
rubio i would . but that's not the issue my problem with what he did is he continues to put out this fiction that there's widespread systematic discrimination against muslim americans . first of all , let's recognize this . if you go to a national cemetery in this country , you will see stars of davids and crosses , but you see crescent moons . there are brave men and women who happen to be muslim americans who are serving this country in uniform and who have died in the service of this country . and we recognize that and we honor that . but by the same token , we face a very significant threat of home grown violent extremism . we need to have strong , positive relationships in the islamic communities in this country so they will identify and report this activity , especially mosques , for example , that are participating not just in hate speech , but inciting violence and taking acts against us . and i do believe it is important also to recognize , you want to talk about religious discrimination in america . well , i don't think barack obama is being sued by any islamic groups , but he is being sued by the little sisters of the poor . we are facing in this country christian groups and groups that hold traditional values who feel and in fact are being discriminated against by the laws of this country that try to force them to vie to violate their conscience . 
kasich well , look , i'm an old fashioned person here , and i happen to believe in traditional marriage . but i've also said the court has ruled 
trump and george bush by the way , george bush had the chance , also , and he didn't listen to the advice of his c . i . a . 
trump this guy has a number one the number one absentee record in the united states . . . 
kasich as an executive no . as an executive , i would figure out how to separate those people who can afford it versus those people , or the hard working folks who put those money in those institutions . . . booing . . . let me no , no . let me say another thing . here's what i mean by that . here's what i mean by that . 
carson neil , i was mentioned too . 
huckabee since he brought me up , do i not get to respond ? 
trump right . 
paul how is it conservative to add a trillion dollars in military expenditures ? you can not be a conservative if you're going to keep promoting new programs that you're not going to pay for . 
fiorina i very much hope i am the only person on this stage who can say this , but i know there are millions of americans out there who will say the same thing . my husband frank and i buried a child to drug addiction . so , we must invest more in the treatment of drugs . 
rubio . . . we're going to win , win win , he's winning in the polls . . . 
trump . . . the biggest problem . . . crosstalk 
trump well , there's nothing to respond to . well , people feel differently . i mean , the fact is benghazi was a disaster because of libya , everything just fell into place . it could not have been worse . what do we have now ? we have nothing . we've spent 3 trillion and probably much more i have no idea what we've spent . thousands and thousands of lives , we have nothing . wounded warriors all over the place who i love , we have nothing for it . and by the way and ben said incorrectly and i'm not saying this as a knock he's one of finest men . you're not going to find a finer men . but i've been talking about oil for three years . i've been saying , , take the oil , take the oil . i didn't say , just bomb it , i said , take it and use it and distribute it so that the wounded warriors people , i've been saying this now for many years . 
trump please , if i could just . . . 
trump this is a reporter , not a high school kid . 
bush no . i didn't say that . you you asked a question not about the draft , you asked about registering . and if women are going to be . . . 
kasich but but wait a minute . it's a lot of ad hogshead . now , i know that it may be buzzing out there , but i think it's important we get to the issues , because that's what people want , and they don't want all this fighting . 
christie well , he deserves credit for his record on jobs . he's done a very good job as governor of ohio . never said that john hasn't . he's done a very good job . but but unfortunately , john's been so busy doing over stuff , he's using old statistics . that's ok . new jersey had its best year of job growth in the last 15 years under five different governors this year in new jersey . new jersey cut spending over 2 . 3 billion and we have 10 , 000 fewer employees than we had when i walked in the door . john has a bigger government now and more employees than he had when he walked in the door . but all that doesn't matter . what really matters is this , that executive experience really matters . you heard this on the stage tonight . we've heard it said on the stage that president obama knows exactly what he's doing . i'd like to ask all the veterans listening out there tonight , who are waiting in line for healthcare , who are literally dying because the veterans administration doesn't work , do you think barack obama knows what he's doing ? i don't . and i'll tell you something . anybody who evaluates him is knowing what he's doing and managing the government doesn't know how to manage a government themselves . and one last thing , david , which i think is really important . i listened to senator rubio's answer on his bill . he said his bill couldn't pass on the gang of eight . he acted as if he was somehow disembodied from the bill . it was his bill . he said this idea doesn't work . it was his idea . see , when you're a governor , you have to take responsibility for these things . you can't just act as if it happened out of nowhere . we have to take responsibility as executives . i take responsibility for my record in new jersey . we've rebuilt the economy and rebuilt after the second worst natural disaster in american history . i'm proud of my record . and by the way , i like kasich's record , too . he's a good governor . 
rubio but this is my time . i want to go back to this question you asked about the debt . this is an important issue . it's a huge issue , ok ? in less than five years , 83 percent of our entire budget will be made up of social security , medicare , medicaid , and the interest on the debt . that means only 17 percent of our budget will be for things like the military or the department of education or environmental protection issues . you cannot balance our budget unless you deal with that 83 percent , which is why i've been repeatedly talking about since my time running for the senate in florida , where there are a lot of people like my mother that depend on social security and medicare , on the need to save those programs , by reforming the way they work for future generations . and i think if we the longer we take to do this , the closer we are going to get to a debt crisis . and , wolf , you did not get an answer to your question . this debt issue is the next president of the united states will not be able to serve four to eight years without dealing with the national debt . it is not a question of if , it is a question of when we have a debt crisis . and we should not leave the stage here tonight without hearing a serious answer from every single one of us about how we are going to deal bring the national debt under control once and for all . 
trump excuse me . we are going to take those people and those people are going to be serviced by doctors and hospitals . we're going to make great deals on it , but we're not going to let them die in the streets . 
fiorina well , first , kim jong un is a dangerous leader , without a doubt . and both republican and democrat administrations have been completely ineffective in dealing with him . so we must continue to isolate him . we will need china as part of that strategy . china is a rising adversary . so one of the things we have to do if we want china's support is to push back on china . they , too , recognize one thing strength and their own economic interest . i have done business in china for 25 years , so i know that in order to get china to cooperate with us , we must first actually retaliate against their cyber attacks so they know we're serious . we have to push back on their desire to control the trade route through the south china sea through which flows 5 trillion worth of goods and services every year . we cannot let them control the disputed islands , and we must work with the australians , the south koreans , the japanese and the filipinos to contain china . and then we must ask for their support and their help with north korea . because believe it or not , china is as concerned about kim jong un as we are . 
kasich jake , jake . 
trump well , i would say my wife tells me i'm wrong all the time . and i listen . laughter 
bush you have to reform social security , and the simple way to do it is to make sure that the wealthiest don't receive the same benefits as people that are lower income . and make sure you enhance savings in the private market . the idea of 401 k s . i have a small business that i set up . it took it took an arm and a leg to be able to set up a 401 k . because of all the federal mandates and federal laws , it was too expensive . we need to incent private savings and make sure that social security is protected for those that have it . 
huckabee . . . we need to honor our promises . . . crosstalk 
cruz well , look , there are some folks in washington . . . 
trump just excuse me , one second , rand . . . 
trump eleven points , to be exact . 
trump . . . i beat hillary clinton . . . 
fiorina i understand . 
huckabee well , john , i don't really have any weaknesses that i can think of . laughter but my wife is down here in the front , and i'm sure , if you'd like to talk to her later , she can give you more than you'll ever be able to take care of . if i have a weakness , it's that i try to live by the rules . i try to live by the rules , no matter what they are , and i was brought up that way as a kid . play by the rules . and i'll tell you what a weakness is of this country there are a lot of people who are sick and tired because washington does not play by the same rules that the american people have to play by . 
fiorina good evening . my story , from secretary to ceo , is only possible in this nation , and proves that everyone of us has potential . my husband , frank , of 30 years , started out driving a tow truck for a family owned auto body shop . we have come to a pivotal point in our nation's history where this nation's possibilities and potential are being crushed by a government grown so big , so powerful , so inept , so corrupt , and a political class that refuses to do anything about it . i am prepared to lead the resurgence of this great nation . 
trump . . . excuse me , the lead plaintiff signed a letter saying how great it was , and it on tape saying how great it was . 
cruz that's flat out wrong . 
fiorina john , i if i a lot of people have jumped in here . i'd like to jump in . a lot of people have jumped in here . 
trump we are not . 
bush the governor's absolutely right . but we also need to reform medicare and social security . we can't just allow it to continue on its current path the way that hillary clinton wants to do because there'll be major reductions in benefits in the next decade if we do nothing . i have a concrete plan to do just that , which allows people to keep hsas to encourage savings , it allows for people that are retiring with social security to be able to get a minimum of 125 percent of the poverty level so that there is a baseline that in this generous country of ours no one goes below . 
cruz . . . and as president , i'm going to fight for the working men and women . crosstalk 
kasich yeah . but and i kind of think that , before it's all said and done , i'll be the nominee . but let me also say . . . but let me also say , remember . . . 
bush yeah . 
trump i watched him meltdown on the stage like that , i've never seen it in anybody . . . 
kasich david , david . . . 
christie thank you . i've spent the last 13 years of my life focused on one thing serving the people who have given me the opportunity to serve them . not about politics , not about partisanship , but putting the people of my state and our country first . i'm proud to have rebuild my state after hurricane sandy , and i'm incredibly proud to be on this stage tonight with these men asking for your vote . new hampshire , i spent 70 days here with you . you've gotten to know my heart . my heart is to help you solve the problems of your state . . . bell rings . . . and the problems of our nation . if you give me your vote on tuesday i will do just that . 
trump i don't know her , and this is a total mischaracterization . . . 
trump many of them . 
carson yeah , he said everybody . laughter and and i just want to take this opportunity to say , you know , in the 2012 election , you know , we and when i say we , republicans tore themselves apart . you know , we have to stop this because , you know , if we manage to damage ourselves , and we lose the next election , and a progressive gets in there and they get two or three supreme court picks , this nation is over as we know it . and we got to look at the big picture here . 
cruz 62 at tedcruz . org . 
kasich carolina's going to win that one . i hate to say it . but they're going to win that one . 
trump . . . we're supporting troops . . . 
cruz dana , what i said in private is exactly what i'll say here , which is that the judgment that every voter is making of every one of us up here is who has the experience , who has the vision , who has the judgment to be commander in chief . that is the most important decision for the voters to make . that's a standard i'm held to . and it's a standard everyone else is held to . and i will note , you know , in the whole course of this discussion about our foreign policy threats , it actually illustrates the need for clarity of focus . you know , my daughters , caroline and catherine , came tonight . they're 7 and 5 . and you think about the los angeles schools canceling their schools today . and every parent is wondering , how do we keep our kids safe ? we need a commander in chief who does what ronald reagan did with communism , which is he set out a global strategy to defeat soviet communism . and he directed all of his . . . crosstalk i'm answering the question , dana . he directed all of his forces to defeating communism . one of the things we've seen here is how easy it is for barack obama and hillary clinton to get distracted from dealing with radical islamic terrorism . they won't even call it by its name . we need a president who stands up , number one , and says , we will defeat isis . and number two , says the greatest national security threat facing america is a nuclear iran . 
bush look , he mentioned me . i can bring i can talk . this is this is the problem . banning all muslims will make it harder for us to do exactly what we need to do , which is to destroy isis . we need a strategy . we need to get the lawyers off the back of the warfighters . right now under president obama , we've created this this standard that is so high that it's impossible to be successful in fighting isis . we need to engage with the arab world to make this happen . it is not a serious proposal to say that to the people that you're asking for their support that they can't even come to the country to even engage in a dialogue with us . that's not a serious proposal . we need a serious leader to deal with this . and i believe i'm that guy . 
trump i didn't take the property . 
rubio that's where he would be . 
bush knowing what we know now , with faulty intelligence , and not having security be the first priority when when we invaded , it was a mistake . i wouldn't have gone in , however , for the people that did lose their lives , and the families that suffer because of it i know this full well because as governor of the state of florida , i called every one of them . every one of them that i could find to tell them that i was praying for them , that i cared about them , and it was really hard to do . and , every one of them said that their child did not die in vain , or their wife , of their husband did not die in vain . so , why it was difficult for me to do it was based on that . here's the lesson that we should take from this , which relates to this whole subject . barack obama became president , and he abandoned iraq . he left , and when he left al qaida was done for . isis was created because timer sounds of the void that we left , and that void now exists as a caliphate the size of indiana . to honor the people that died , we need to we need to stop the iran agreement , for sure , because the iranian mullahs have their blood on their hands , and we need to take out isis with every tool at our disposal . 
rubio that's not accurate . i'm sorry , megyn , that's not accurate . that's my there were at least 300 americans that applied last year , none of them were hired . some of them . . . 
bush or dealing with the islamic terrorism that exists . 
trump give me a break . 
trump lyin' ted . 
carson my plan is not amnesty for a number of reasons . number one , you know , i've talked to farmers , and they said they cannot hire americans to do the kind of job that i'm talking about . and the second reason is because the individuals who register as guest workers , they don't get to vote , they are not american citizens , and they don't get the rights and privileges of american citizens . so that's key . but the other thing that i want to bring up is , i mentioned something earlier . i think it was just sort of glossed over . i talked about the success in yuma county , i mean , incredible success , and the department of justice said , no , we don't want to do that . that's too successful . we don't have to keep reinventing the wheel . all we have to do is look at things that work . all we have to do is use a little common sense . 
trump that's why the people in florida do not like him . 
trump no , not a comic book , and it's not a very nicely asked question the way you say that . larry kudlow is an example , who i have a lot of respect for , who loves my tax plan . we're reducing taxes to 15 percent . we're bringing corporate taxes down , bringing money back in , corporate inversions . we have 2 . 5 trillion outside of the united states which we want to bring back in . as far as the wall is concerned , we're going to build a wall . we're going to create a border . we're going to let people in , but they're going to come in legally . they're going to come in legally . and it's something that can be done , and i get questioned about that . they built the great wall of china . that's 13 , 000 miles . here , we actually need 1 , 000 because we have natural barriers . so we need 1 , 000 . we can do a wall . we're going to have a big , fat beautiful door right in the middle of the wall . we're going to have people come in , but they're coming in legally . and mexico's going to pay for the wall because mexico i love the mexican people ; i respect the mexican leaders but the leaders are much sharper , smarter and more cunning than our leaders . and just to finish , people say , how will you get mexico to pay ? a politician other than the people in the states i don't want to a politician cannot get them to pay . i can . we lose , we have a trade imbalance . . . excuse me , john . . . . of 50 billion . . . 
cruz . . . middle ground that brings both of these together . . . 
trump excuse me . excuse me , there are wonderful things having to do with women's health . 
trump . . . i thought he came out of the swimming pool . . . 
kasich you know , this so much about process . it frankly is boring to me . i would like it clear though , since we're talking about polls , i beat hillary clinton by more than 11 points , and the reason it happens . . . cheering 
carson well , there's not question that we should be able to look at past president whether they're married to somebody who's running for president or not in terms of their past behavior and what it means . but you know , here's the real issue , is this america anymore ? do we still have standards ? do we still have values and principles ? you know , you look at what's going on , you see all the divisiveness and the hatred that goes on in our society . you know , we have a war on virtual everything race wars , gender wars , income wars , religious wars , age wars . every war you can imaging , we have people at each other's throat and our strength is actually in our unity . you know , you go to the internet , you start reading an article and you go to the comments section you cannot go five comments down before people are calling each all manner of names . where did that spirit come from in america ? it did not come from our judeo christian roots , i can tell you that . and wherever it came from we need to start once again recognizing that there is such a thing as right and wrong . and let's not let the secular progressives drive that out of us . the majority of people in american actually have values and principles and they believe in the very things that made america great . they've been beaten into submission . it's time for us to stand up for what we believe in . 
cruz well , i would note , initially the fact that we're seeing the launch , and we're seeing the launch from a nuclear north korea is the direct result of the failures of the first clinton administration . the clinton administration led the world in relaxing sanctions against north korea . billions of dollars flowed into north korea in exchange for promises not to build nuclear weapons . they took those billions and built nuclear weapons . and , i would note also the lead negotiator in that failed north korea sanctions deal was a woman named wendy sherman who barack obama and hillary clinton promptly recruited to come back to be the lead negotiator with iran . so , what we are seeing with north korea is foreshadowing of where we will be with iran . with respect to north korea and what we should do now , one of the first things we should do is expand our missile defense capacity . we ought to put missile defense interceptors in south korea . south korea wants them . one of the real risks of this launch , north korea wants to launch a satellite , and one of the greatest risks of the satellite is they would place a nuclear device in the satellite . as it would orbit around the earth , and as it got over the united states they would detonate that nuclear weapon and set of what's called an emp , and electromagnetic pulse which could take down the entire electrical grid on the eastern seaboard , potentially killing millions . we need to harden the grid to defend ourselves , and we need missile defense to protect ourselves against north korea . 
trump well , because she's been sitting for three hours , i think my daughter , ivanka , who's right here . 
trump . . . you get rid of the lines , it brings in competition . so , instead of having one insurance company taking care of new york , or texas , you'll have many . they'll compete , and it'll be a beautiful thing . 
christie i stood on the stage and watched marco in rather indignantly , look at governor bush and say , someone told you that because we're running for the same office , that criticizing me will get you to that office . it appears that the same someone who has been whispering in old marco's ear too . laughter so the indignation that you carry on , some of the stuff , you have to also own then . so let's set the facts straight . first of all , i didn't support sonia sotomayor . secondly , i never wrote a check to planned parenthood . third , if you look at my record as governor of new jersey , i have vetoed a 50 caliber rifle ban . i have vetoed a reduction this clip size . i vetoed a statewide i . d . system for gun owners and i pardoned , six out of state folks who came through our state and were arrested for owning a gun legally in another state so they never have to face charges . and on common core , common core has been eliminated in new jersey . so listen , this is the difference between being a governor and a senator . see when you're a senator , what you get to do is just talk and talk and talk . and you talk so much that nobody can ever keep up with what you're saying is accurate or not . when you're a governor , you're held accountable for everything you do . and the people of new jersey , i've seen it . 
fiorina well 
kasich no . no , i didn't say that . 
kasich no republican has ever been elected president of the united states without winning ohio . let me give you a little tip on how you win ohio , it's reform , it's hope , it's growth , it's opportunity , and it's security . the people of ohio are the people of america . the people of america are reflected in ohio . our message has to be big , and bold , and positive , and connect , not just with people's heads but also connect with their hearts . if we do it , we will beat hillary clinton , and we will run the white house , and we will strengthen and fix america , i promise you . 
rubio . . . inaudible this anymore . 
rubio yes , you've hired a thousand from another country . . . 
trump he didn't answer he's not a leader . and , frankly , when i say they'll do as i tell them , they'll do as i tell them . and that's very it's very simple . it's very simple . we are in a very dangerous place . we have a depleted military . totally depleted . we have by the way , our vets are treated horribly . we're going to take care of our vets . we're going to start taking care of our vets , properly , like we should . but we're going to build up our military , and we're going to get the equipment we want , not the equipment that's sold to us by somebody that gave him and him and not the governor campaign contributions . ok ? we're going to get the equipment that the generals and the soldiers want . i will prove to be a great leader . and , you know , it's very interesting , we talk about the polls . every single poll when it comes to isis and the military and the border say , by far , trump is the best . 
kasich well , ladies and gentlemen , i love being here in michigan , and i want to say to all of you here that i have a record of being able to solve some of the biggest problems . it's not just talk , and it's not theory . i did it in washington by helping people get into a healthier economic situation . i've done it in ohio . and as we've made progress in ohio , we've left no one behind . we've not left behind the mentally ill , the drug addicted , the working poor , the developmental disabled , and we have raised our minority community . and as president of the united states , i will go back to washington , i will take the formulas that i used , and i will i will fix the problems in washington , and you'll work with me as i send you power to fix your your communities , your neighborhoods , your state , and together , we'll restore the spirit of america . and i know you want that . thank you . 
kasich i'll do it in washington . i've done it twice ; i'll do it thrice for the united states of america . 
cruz you know , i actually think donald is right . he is promising if he's elected he will go and cut deals in washington . and he's right . he has supported he has given hundreds of thousands of dollars to democrats . anyone who really cared about illegal immigration wouldn't be hiring illegal immigrants . anyone who really cared about illegal immigration wouldn't be funding harry reid and nancy pelosi ; wouldn't be funding the gang of eight . and , you know , he is right . when you stand up to washington , when you honor the promise you made to the men and women who elected you and say enough with the corruption , enough with the cronyism , let's actually stand for the working men and women of this country , washington doesn't like it . and donald , if you want to be liked in washington , that's not a good attribute for a president . crosstalk 
rubio senator rubio , you mean ? 
carson well , first of all , please go to my website , bencarson . com , and read my immigration policy , o . k . ? because it actually makes sense . now , the as far as these fines are concerned , you know ? here's the big problem . we've got all these government regulators , and all they're doing is running around looking for people to fine . and we've got 645 different federal agencies and sub agencies . way , way too many , and they don't have anything else to do . i think what we really need to do is start trimming the regulatory agencies rather than going after the people who are trying to increase the viability , economic viability of our society . now , that doesn't mean there aren't some people out there who are doing bad things . but i'm not sure that the way to solve that problem is by increasing all the regulatory burden . you know , when you consider how much regulations cost us each year , you know ? 2 trillion dollars per family , 24 , 000 per family , that happens to be the same level as the poverty level . . . bell rings . . . for a family of four . if you want to get rid of poverty , get rid of all the regulations . 
trump no , but it's another lie . this guy doesn't know what he's talking about . just a lie . 
rubio there's a difference between flexibility and telling people whatever you think you need to say to get them to do what you want them to do . cheering and , that's what donald has done throughout his career . 
walker but jake , jake , jake , jake . . . 
christie well , i'm glad you asked that , maria . here's here's our plan . we've all been talking about tax reforms tonight , and paying for infrastructure is caught right up in tax reform . if you reform the corporate tax system in this country , which , as was mentioned before , is the highest rate in the world and we double tax , as you know . and what that's led to over 2 trillion of american companies' monies that are being kept offshore , because they don't want to pay the second tax . and who can blame them ? they pay tax once overseas . they don't want to pay 35 percent tax on the way back . so beside reforming that tax code , bringing it down to 25 percent and eliminating those special interest loopholes that the lobbyists and the lawyers and the accountants have given bring that rate down to 25 percent , but also , a one time repatriation of that money . bring the money the 2 trillion back to the united states . we'll tax it , that one time , at 8 . 75 percent , because 35 percent of zero is zero , but 8 . 75 percent of 2 trillion is a lot of money . and i would then dedicate that money to rebuilding infrastructure here in this country . it would not necessitate us raising any taxes . it would bring the money back into the united states to help build jobs by american companies and get our economy moving again , and growing as a higher rate , and it would rebuild those roads and bridges and tunnels that you were talking about . and and and the last piece of this , maria , is this . you know , the fact is that this president has penalized corporations in america . he's penalized and doesn't understand . in fact , what that hurts is hurt hardworking taxpayers . you've seen middle class wages go backwards 3 , 700 during the obama administration . that's wrong for hardworking taxpayers in this country . we'd rebuild infrastructure that would also create jobs in this country , and we'd work with the states to do it the right way , to do it more efficiently and more effectively . and remember this i'm credible on this for this reason americans for tax reform says that i've vetoed more tax increases than any governor in american history . we don't need to raise taxes to get this done . we need to make the government run smarter and better , and reform this corporate tax system , bring that money back to the united states to build jobs and rebuild our infrastructure , and we need to use it also to protect our grid from terrorists . all of those things are important , and all those things would happen in a christie administration . 
trump am i allowed to respond ? i have to respond . 
rubio well first , i think well , i'd be open to it if it takes a pause . but i don't think it takes a pause to enforce the law . what they are doing is they are in fact using that program to replace an american . if there's an american working at disney and they bring someone from another country using h1b to replace their direct job , that's in violation of the law . and what i'm explaining to you is , what they are doing now is they are not what they are doing is they are eliminating the job . they are outsourcing the entire tech division to a consulting company . they are making the argument that we didn't replace you . we just replaced the whole unit by hiring a company to do it instead . and that company that they're hiring is bringing their workers from abroad . it's a loophole they've figured out that we need to close so they can no longer continue to do it that way . 
cruz did you say if you want people to die on the streets , if you don't support socialized health care , you have no heart . 
christie you know , i've been called a lot of names by a lot of different people , and now i got to get called by names by the secret service ? i would just say true heart . 
trump i think it's very sad that cnn leads jeb bush , governor bush , down a road by starting off virtually all the questions , mr . trump this , mister i think it's very sad . and , frankly , i watched i think it's very sad . and , frankly , i watched the first debate , and the first long number of questions were , mr . trump said this , mr . trump said that . mr . trump these poor guys although , i must tell you , santorum , good guy . governor huckabee , good guy . they were very nice , and i respect them greatly . but i thought it was very unfair that virtually the entire early portion of the debate was trump this , trump that , in order to get ratings , i guess . in order to get ratings , i guess . 
fiorina like all of you i'm angry . i'm angry at what's happening to our nation . citizens , it's time to take our country back . bombastic insults wont take it back . political rhetoric that promises a lot and delivers little , won't take it back . all of our problems can be solved . all of our wounds can be healed by a tested leader who is willing to fight for the character of our nation . i have been tested . i have beaten breast cancer . i have buried a child . i started as a secretary . i fought my way to the top of corporate america while being called every b word in the book . i fought my way into this election and on to this debate stage while all the political insiders and the pundits told , it couldn't be done . i've been told , no , all my life . and all my life , i've refused to accept no as an answer . citizens , it is time to take our country back from the political class , from the media , from the liberal elite . it can be done , it must be done , join me and we will get it done . 
bush no , i can't say that . but i can say , if you created higher capital requirements , that's the solution to this , not having concentration of assets . the bigger banks now have more and more control over over the financial assets of this country . and that is the wrong approach to take . 
paul and actually , under the current circumstances , kids who had privilege like you do , don't go to jail , but the poor kids in our inner cities go to jail . i don't think that's fair . and i think we need to acknowledge it , and it is hypocritical to still want to put poor people in jail . . . 
bush the government grew by . . . 
trump . . . yeah . . . 
fiorina when america does not lead , the world is a dangerous and a tragic place . this is a bad deal . obama broke every rule of negotiation . yes , our allies are not perfect , but iran is at the heart of most of the evil that is going on in the middle east through their proxy . video clip ends 
cruz well , my mom is here , so i don't think we should be pushing any grannies off cliffs . laughter and , you miss stated what i've said on entitlement reform . what i've said is for seniors we should make no changes whatsoever , for younger workers we should gradually raise the retirement age , we should have benefits grow more slowly , and we should allow them to keep a portion of their taxes in a personal account that they control , and can pass on to their kids . . . 
bush no , you're wrong you're wrong about this . 
christie well , thank you , megyn . listen , i was born into a middle class family in new jersey . my dad came home from serving in the army after having lost his father , worked in the breyers ice cream plant in newark , new jersey . was the first person to graduate from college . he put himself through college at night . my mom was a secretary . i was appointed united states attorney on september 10 , 2001 . and i spent the next seven years of my career fighting terrorism and putting terrorists in jail . i'm a conservative , pro life governor in a state where it is really tough to be both . a state like new jersey , with lots of democrats , but still we cut taxes , we balanced budgets . we fought timer sounds the teacher's union . this president has had weak leadership , which has led to bad choices . we have got to stop worrying about being loved and start worrying about being respected . and that's exactly how i'll lead our country . 
cruz and we need to be focused on defeating . . . 
kasich no one is no let me let me suggest to you we believe that we operate better in the world when our allies work with us . president bush did it in the gulf war . we work better when we are unified . secondly , nobody's trusting iran . they violate the deal , we put on the sanctions , and we have the high moral ground to talk to our allies in europe to get them to go with us . if they don't go with us , we slap the sanctions on anyway . if they fund these radical groups that threaten israel and all of the west , then we should rip up the deal and put the sanctions back on . and let me make it clear let me make it clear . . . crosstalk 
bush no . and worse worse yet , to be honest with you , hillary clinton would be a national security disaster . think about it . she wants to continue down the path of iran , benghazi , the russian reset , dodd frank , all the things that have that have gone wrong in this country , she would be a national security mess . and that is wrong . and you know what ? here's the problem . if she gets elected , she's under investigation with the fbi right now . if she gets elected , her first 100 days , instead of setting an agenda , she might be going back and forth between the white house and the courthouse . we need to stop that . laughter and applause 
cruz well , let me take two different parts of that . let me start with socialized medicine . socialized medicine is a disaster . it does not work . if you look at the countries that have imposed socialized medicine , that have put the government in charge of providing medicine , what inevitably happens is rationing . you have a scarcity of doctors . you have rationing . and that means the elderly are told , we're going to ration a hip replacement , we're going to ration a knee replacement . we're going to ration end of life care . we're right now heading into a medical system with about a 90 , 000 doctor shortage in america and socialized medicine ; whether proposed by the democrats or proposed by a republican would hurt the people of this country . what should we do on health care ? if i'm elected president , we will repeal every word of obamacare . and once we do that , we will adopt common sense reforms , number one , we'll allow people to purchase health insurance across state lines that will drive down prices and expand the availability of low cost catastrophic insurance . we'll expand health savings accounts ; and we will de link health insurance from employment so that you don't lose your health insurance when you lose your job , and that way health insurance can be personal , portable and affordable and we keep government from getting in between us and our doctors . 
cruz i want to go back to the discussion we had a minute ago because , you know , what was said was right . the democrats are laughing because if republicans join democrats as the party of amnesty , we will lose . and , you know , i understand that when the mainstream media covers immigration , it doesn't often see it as an economic issue . but , i can tell you for millions of americans at home watching this , it is a very personal economic issue . and , i will say the politics of it will be very , very different if a bunch of lawyers or bankers were crossing the rio grande . audience reaction or if a bunch of people with journalism degrees were coming over and driving down the wages in the press . audience reaction applause and cheering then , we would see stories about the economic calamity that is befalling our nation . and , i will say for those of us who believe people 'ought to come to this country legally , and we should enforce the law , we're tired of being told it's anti immigrant . it's offensive . i am the son of an immigrant who came legally from cuba . . . bell ringing . . . to seek the american dream . and , we can embrace legal immigration while believing in the rule of law and i would note , try going illegally to another country . try going to china , or japan . try going to mexico . see what they do . every sovereign nation secures its borders , and it is not compassionate to say we're not going to enforce the laws . . . bell ringing . . . and we're going to drive down the wages for millions of hardworking men and women . that is abandoning the working . . . 
rubio . . . they were not hired . . . 
trump you've got another gentleman in florida , who happens to be a very nice guy , but not . . . 
trump you are going to have to bring people you are going to have to send people out . look , we're a country . . . 
rubio you ever heard of trump steaks ? you ever heard of trump vodka ? 
cruz which years ? which years are you being audited ? 
bush i want to thank the people of new hampshire , and i want to celebrate the birthday of a great president , ronald reagan would have been 105 today . president reagan believed in the future of our country , believed in its greatness , had a hopeful , optimistic message . drew people towards our cause . we need someone who has a proven record to take our case to the american people because our philosophy is by far the best one . limited government , entrepreneurial capitalism , of peace through strength . i believe i have the skills to take our party to victory in november . i ask for your support on tuesday to keep america , and make america a safer , stronger , and freer . thank you all very much . 
rubio yes , you know , bret , let me say something . this campaign for the last year donald trump has basically mocked everybody with personal attacks . he has done so to people that are sitting on the stage today . he has done so about people that are disabled . he has done it about every candidate in this race . so if there is anyone who has ever deserved to be attacked that way , it has been donald trump , for the way he has treated people in the campaign . now that said , i would much prefer to have a policy debate . i hope that's what we will have here tonight . let's have a policy debate . . . 
rubio well , i know i've talked about it , and others in our campaign have talked about it , and other candidates have talked about it , as well . what happened in flint was a terrible thing . it was systemic breakdown at every level of government , at both the federal and partially the both the state and partially at the federal level , as well . and by the way , the politicizing of it i think is unfair , because i don't think that someone woke up one morning and said , let's figure out how to poison the water system to hurt someone . but accountability is important . i will say , i give the governor credit . he took responsibility for what happened . and he's talked about people being held accountable . . . . . . and the need for change , with governor snyder . but here's the point . this should not be a partisan issue . the way the democrats have tried to turn this into a partisan issue , that somehow republicans woke up in the morning and decided , oh , it's a good idea to poison some kids with lead . it's absurd . it's outrageous . it isn't true . all of us are outraged by what happened . and we should work together to solve it . and there is a proper role for the government to play at the federal level , in helping local communities to respond to a catastrophe of this kind , not just to deal with the people that have been impacted by it , but to ensure that something like this never happens again . 
trump they devalue their currencies . i will do that . and by the way , i have been doing it more and more . but they devalue their currencies , in particular china . mexico is doing a big number now , also . japan is unbelievable what they're doing . they devalue their currencies , and they make it impossible for clothing makers in this country to do clothing in this country . and if you look at what's happened on seventh avenue , and you look at what's happened in new york with the garment industry , so much of the clothing now comes out from vietnam , china , and other places . and it's all because of devaluation . by the way , the trans pacific , if you look at the tpp , a total disaster , which , by the way , marco is in favor of , they need it is a disaster for our country . it's trying to be approved by various people , including president obama . and i'll tell you something . the biggest problem with that is they don't take into concurrence the devaluation . they're devaluing their currency . 
carson well , thank you , megyn , i wasn't sure i was going to get to talk again . 
trump i promise if i wanted it , i would have gotten it . 
trump thank you . my whole theme is make america great again . we don't win anymore as a country . we don't win with trade , we don't win with the military . isis , we can't even knock out isis , and we will , believe me . we will . we don't win in any capacity with healthcare . we have terrible health care , obamacare is going to be repealed and replaced . we just don't win . you look at our borders , they're like swiss cheese , everybody pours in . we're going to make a great country again . we're going to start winning again . we're going to win a lot , it's going to be a big difference , believe me . it's going to be a big difference . 
trump because they devalue their currency they devalue their currencies . . . 
trump all right , you know what ? 
trump i would be so different from what you have right now . like , the polar opposite . we have a president who doesn't have a clue . i would say he's incompetent , but i don't want to do that because that's not nice . laughter but if you look at the deals we make , whether it's the nuclear deal with 24 hour periods and by the way , before you get to the 24 hours , you have to go through a system . you look at sgt . bergdahl , we get bergdahl , a traitor , and they get five of the big , great killers leaders that they want . we have people in washington that don't know what they're doing . now . . . applause ; scream from audience i agree . now , with iran , we're making a deal , you would say , we want him . we want out our prisoners . we want all these things , and we don't get anything . we're giving them 150 billion dollars plus , they are going to be i'll tell you what , if iran was a stock , you folks should go out and buy it right now because you'll quadruple this , what's happening timer sounds in iran , is a disgrace , and it's going to lead to destruction in large portions of the world . 
trump i fully understand . 
bush i would go with ronald reagan's partner , margaret thatcher . probably illegal , but what the heck ? since it's not going to happen . a strong leader is what we need in the white house , and she certainly was a strong leader that restored the united kingdom into greatness . 
trump i funded this guy . i gave him a check . 
christie let's force him to do what he says he's going to do . now i don't know whether he'll do it or not , but let's force him to do it . 
rubio we must defeat hillary clinton . 
cruz . . . income tax . . . 
christie maria , you look at what this president and his secretary of state , secretary of state clinton , has done to get us in this spot . you think about it this is the president who said , along with his secretary of state drew a red line in syria , said , if assad uses chemical weapons against his people , that we're going to attack . he used chemical weapons , he's killed , now , over a quarter of a million of his own people , and this president has done nothing . in fact , he's done worse than nothing . this president and , by the way , secretary clinton , who called assad a reformer she called assad a reformer . now , the fact is , what this president has done is invited russia to play an even bigger role , bring in vladimir putin to negotiate getting those chemical weapons back from assad , yet what do we have today ? we have the russians and the iranians working together , not to fight isis , but to prop up assad . the fact of the matter is we're not going to have peace we are not going to have peace in syria . we're not going to be able to rebuild it unless we put a no fly zone there , make it safe for those folks so we don't have to be talking about syrian refugees anymore . the syrians should stay in syria . they shouldn't be going to europe . and here's the last piece . . . . . . you're not going to have peace in syria with assad in charge . you're simply not . and so senator graham is right about this . and if we want to try to rebuild the coalition , as governor kasich was saying before , then what we better do is to get to the arab countries that believe that isis is a threat , not only to them , but to us and to world peace , and bring them together . and believe me , assad is not worth it . and if you're going to leave this to hillary clinton , the person who gave us this foreign policy , the architect of it , and you're going to give her another four years , that's why i'm speaking out as strongly as i am about that . hillary clinton cannot be president . it will lead to even greater war in this world . and remember this , after hillary clinton and barack obama have had nearly 8 years , we have fewer democracies in the world than we had when they started . that makes the world less peaceful , less safe . in my administration , we will help to make sure we bring people together in the middle east , and we will fight isis and defeat them . 
carson when when we put all the facts down , you'll be able to see that it's not true , it works out very well . 
trump well , it's an interesting question because i'm very proud of my company . as you too know , i know i built a very great company . but if i become president , i couldn't care less about my company . it's peanuts . i want to use that same up here , whatever it may be to make america rich again and to make america great again . i have ivanka , and eric and don sitting there . run the company kids , have a good time . i'm going to do it for america . so i would i would be willing to do that . 
trump and they're killing they're going to . . . crosstalk 
bush this is another example of the lack of seriousness . look , this is this is troubling because we're at war . they've declared war on us and we need to have a serious strategy to destroy isis . but the idea that that is a solution to this is just is just crazy . it makes no sense to suggest this . look , two months ago donald trump said that isis was not our fight . just two months ago he said that hillary clinton would be a great negotiator with iran . and he gets his foreign policy experience from the shows . that is not a serious kind of candidate . we need someone that thinks this through . that can lead our country to safety and security . 
trump hey ted , where i support it ? 
trump ? . . . slow ph and steady , inaudible chicken . . . 
trump well , i've given him plenty of money . 
bush 
trump i've actually been in politics all my life , although i've been on that side as opposed to this side . i'm now a politician for about three months . obviously , i'm doing pretty well . i'm number one in every poll by a lot . but the qualification is that i've dealt with people all over the world , been successful all over the world . everything i've done virtually has been a tremendous success . when markets changed , when things turned , i heard governor pataki , who , by the way , was a failed governor in new york , a very seriously failed he wouldn't be elected dog catcher right now . i heard what he had to say . and i will tell you this atlantic city , i've made a tremendous amount of money in atlantic city . i left seven years ago , i've gotten great credit for my timing , and that's what i'm all about . i'm a businessman , did really well , really well , and jeb , what i want to do is put that ability into this country to make our country rich again . and i can do that , and i'm not sure that anybody else in the group will be able to do that . 
bush good evening . 
kasich maria , can we comment on that ? 
kasich i don't at this point in terms of changing the incentives for investment and risk taking . but let's just stop for a second . there's one person on this stage that does have a record . i'm the only person on the stage and one of the few people in this country that led the effort as the chief architect of the last time we balanced the federal budget . we also cut taxes . and when i left washington in 2000 , we had a 5 trillion surplus , and the economy was booming . i had spent 10 years of my life to get us to that point , went out in the private sector , was a great experience , and went into ohio and took an 8 billion hole and turned it into a 2 billion surplus . we've had the largest amount of tax cuts of any sitting governor . we've grown well over 300 , 000 jobs . you see , i've done it in both places . i'm the only one here that has done it in both places . it took a lot to get us to a balanced budget . it was legitimate . it was real . and we negotiated it . a lot of what we're talking about here tonight as we take this position and that position , you know what ? at the end of the day , america has got to work . we've got to figure out how we come together to deal with this with our fiscal problems because when we deal with that , we create a stronger economy for everybody . people have a chance to rise . so , you know , when we think about how we make a choice , it's the person that lands that plane . it's not somebody that talks about it . it's about the person who has done it . and i've done it in . . . 
carson well , recognize that , you know , president george w . bush is a great friend of ours , and we spent many wonderful days at the white house . i haven't been there in the last seven years . i probably have to have a food tester . laughter but at any rate , i didn't suggest that nothing be done . what i suggested to president bush is to be kennedy esque , in the sense that when the russians got ahead of us in the space race , what we did is use the bully pulpit to galvanize everybody , business , industry , academia behind a national goal to put a man on the moon and bring him back safely . i said , you can do the same kind of thing . declare that within five to 10 years we will become petroleum independent . the moderate arab states would have been so concerned about that , they would have turned over osama bin laden and anybody else you wanted on a silver platter within two weeks . there are smart ways to do things and there are muscular ways to do things . and sometimes you have to look at both of those to come up with the right solution . crosstalk 
trump . . . excuse me , i want to be able to bring peace . . . 
cruz . . . and it's something donald does daily . 
trump autism has become an epidemic . twenty five years ago , 35 years ago , you look at the statistics , not even close . it has gotten totally out of control . i am totally in favor of vaccines . but i want smaller doses over a longer period of time . because you take a baby in and i've seen it and i've seen it , and i had my children taken care of over a long period of time , over a two or three year period of time . same exact amount , but you take this little beautiful baby , and you pump i mean , it looks just like it's meant for a horse , not for a child , and we've had so many instances , people that work for me . just the other day , two years old , two and a half years old , a child , a beautiful child went to have the vaccine , and came back , and a week later got a tremendous fever , got very , very sick , now is autistic . i only say it's not i'm in favor of vaccines , do them over a longer period of time , same amount . 
kasich hey , wolf , wolf . . . 
cruz donald , you are welcome to be president of the smithsonian . you know , there are some in washington who are having fevered dreams of a brokered convention . they are unhappy with how the people are voting and they want to parachute in their favored washington candidate to be the nominee . i think that would be an absolute disaster and we need to respect the will of the voters . it's one of the reasons why in the course of this election listen , everyone up here has worked very hard . but donald is right , there are only two of us that have a path to winning the nomination , donald and myself . at this point , i have roughly 360 delegates . he has about 100 more than i have . we have at this point beaten donald in eight separate states all over the country geographically , from maine to alaska , from kansas to texas , all over this country we have beaten him . and so for the people at home , if you're one of the 65 , 70 percent of republicans who recognizes that if we nominate donald trump , hillary wins . that's why the media wants him to be the nominee so much . if you recognize that , then i want to invite you if you've supported other candidates , come and join us . we are seeing candidates coming together and uniting . it's why carly fiorina endorsed me yesterday . it's why mike lee endorsed me today . i ask everyone to come together . let's stand together and let's beat hillary clinton in november . 
rubio . . . inaudible 
rubio if you go on my website , marcorubio . com , everything we have on there is made in america . the reason why he makes it in china or mexico is because he can make more money on it . that's why he's doing it . and the second point , you see what happens , again , when you challenge him on a policy issue . you asked him about the economy , and the first thing he does is launch an attack about some little guy thing . because he doesn't have answers . 
trump you're right , jake . but it has been taken over by the federal government . it was originally supposed to be that way . and certainly sounds better that way . but it has all been taken over now by the bureaucrats in washington , and they are not interested in what's happening in miami or in florida , in many cases . now in some cases they would be . but in many cases they are more interested in their paycheck and the big bureaucracy than they are taking care of the children . 
carson well first of all , i want people to think about what kind of leader do you want and what kind of person do you want your kids to emulate . think about that . secondly , several years ago , a movie was made about these hands . these hands by the grace of god have saved many lives and healed many families . and i'm asking you tonight , america , to join hands with me to heal , inspire and revive america . if not us , who ? and if not now , when ? 
trump i would probably have the embassy closed until such time as a really good deal was made and struck by the united states . 
bush . . . this is ridiculous . . . 
huckabee . . . no , sir . . . 
christie there it is . there it is . the memorized 25 second speech . there it is , everybody . 
carson i would support the possibility of renewed airstrikes if in conjunction with our joint chiefs and our military people they felt that was an appropriate strategy . the fact of the matter is none of us up here is a military expert , and we sometimes act like we are , but we're not . and if we actually sit down and talk with them and get them to understand our plan and their impression of what needs to be done , i think we're going to make a lot more progress . 
rubio maria , let me clear something up here . this is an interesting point when you talk about immigration . ted cruz , you used to say you supported doubling the number of green cards , now you say that you're against it . you used to support a 500 percent increase in the number of guest workers , now you say that you're against it . you used to support legalizing people that were here illegally , now you say you're against it . you used to say that you were in favor of birthright citizenship , now you say that you are against it . and by the way , it's not just on immigration , you used to support tpa , now you say you're against it . i saw you on the senate floor flip your vote on crop insurance because they told you it would help you in iowa , and last week , we all saw you flip your vote on ethanol in iowa for the same reason . that is not consistent conservatism , that is political calculation . when i am president , i will work consistently every single day to keep this country safe , not call edward snowden , as you did , a great public servant . edward snowden is a traitor . and if i am president and we get our hands on him , he is standing trial for treason . and one more point , one more point . every single time that there has been a defense bill in the senate , three people team up to vote against it . bernie sanders , rand paul and ted cruz . in fact , the only budget you have ever voted for , ted , in your entire time in the senate is a budget from rand paul that brags about how it cuts defense . here's the bottom line , and i'll close with this . if i'm president of the united states and congress tries to cut the military , i will veto that in a millisecond . 
cruz . . . that makes anyone nervous . 
paul yeah , i was talking about inaudible well , let me . . . 
rubio . . . inaudible 
carson well , you know , i've just explained it to him . he can read about it if he wants to . i think he's an intelligent man and will make the correct decision after getting the real facts . 
trump . . . he was not a good governor . 
fiorina . . . you need to give . . . 
cruz well , let me say it at the outset that everyone here understands everyone understands that how that the middle class has been left behind in the last seven years of the obama economy , and we've got to bring jobs back . we've got to get people back to work . we've got to get wages going up again . we've got to get people moving from part time work to full time work . we all agree on that , but it's not going to be solved with magic pixie dust . it's just going to be solved by declaring into the air , let there be jobs . we actually have to understand the principles that made america great in the first place . now , where do you get economic growth ? if you look at cause and effect over our nation's history , every time we lessen the burden of washington on small business owners , on job creators , we see incredible economic growth . you do that through tax reform and regulatory reform . my tax plan typical family of four , first 36 , 000 you earn , you pay nothing in taxes no income taxes , no payroll taxes , no nothing . above 10 percent , everyone pays the same simple , flat 10 percent income rate . it's flat and fair . you can fill out your taxes on a postcard , and we abolish the i . r . s . if you want to see the postcard , i've got it on my website . 
rubio well , first of all , let me say that you're right , there are about 3 million seniors in florida with social security and medicare . one of them is my mother , who happens to be here today . i'm against any changes to social security that are bad for my mother . and we don't have to make any changes for them . but anyone who tells you that social security can stay the way it is is lying . any politician that goes around saying , we don't have to anything ; all we have to do is raise a few taxes or just leave it the way it is , they're not being honest with you . social security will go bankrupt and it will bankrupt the country with it . so what it will require is people younger , like myself , people that are 30 years away from retirement , to accept that our social security is going to work differently than it did for my parents . for example , instead of retiring at 67 the way i'm supposed to retire , i'd have to retire at 68 . if i were still in the senate , i'd be one of the youngest people there . laughter if i've made a lot of money , my social security benefit will not grow as fast as someone who made less money . and by the way , medicare could very well become the option of using my medicare benefit to buy a private plan that i like better . medicare advantage does that now . these are not unreasonable changes to ask of someone like myself who is 25 or 30 years away from retirement , in exchange for leaving the program undisturbed for the people that are on it now or about to retire , and ensuring that we do not bankrupt our country and that this program still exists when my children retire , when my grandchildren retire , when i retire . 
paul first of all , only isis is responsible for the terrorism . only isis is responsible for the depravity . but , we do have to examine , how are we going to defeat isis ? i've got a proposal . i'm the leading voice in america for not arming the allies of isis . i've been fighting amidst a lot of opposition from both hillary clinton , as well as some republicans who wanted to send arms to the allies of isis . isis rides around in a billion dollars worth of u . s . humvees . it's a disgrace . we've got to stop we shouldn't fund our enemies , for goodness sakes . so , we didn't create isis isis created themselves , but we will stop them , and one of the ways we stop them is by not funding them , and not arming them . 
bush also , he talked about one of my heroes , ronald reagan . ronald reagan was a liberal maybe in the 1950s . he was a conservative reformed governor for eight years before he became president , and no one should suggest he made an evolution for political purposes . he was a conservative , and he didn't tear down people like donald trump is . he tore down the berlin wall . 
bush not even possible . 
bush no , i don't think so , but we need to be strong against china . we should use offensive tactics as it relates to cyber security , send a deterrent signal to china . there should be super sanctions in what president obama has proposed . there's many other tools that we have without canceling a dinner . that's not going to change anything , but we can be much stronger as it relates to that . as it relates to iran , it's not a strategy to tear up an agreement . a strategy would be how do we confront iran ? and , the first thing that we need to do is to establish our commitment to israel which has been altered by this administration . and , make sure that they have the most sophisticated weapons to send a signal to iran that we have israel's back . if we do that , it's going to create a healthier deterrent effect than anything else i can think of . 
paul what my bill would do would be only for refugees going forward . so i haven't taken a position on sending anyone home . but i have taken the position that we have a lot of problems here in our country . and that one of the things that we do charity is about giving your own money . charity isn't giving someone else's money . to put everyone in government housing and food stamps and bring them in from around the world i think is a mistake . to give of your own money , i've given to my church . my church has helped people that came from bosnia . that's a good thing . but we shouldn't have a program where we just say that we're going to take care of the world's refugees . nobody in the middle east is doing anything . saudi arabia , qatar , kuwait all the gulf nations are doing nothing . they need to step up and take . . . crosstalk 
cruz martha , i will tell you , i have visited with active duty military , with veterans over and over and over again in town halls all over the state of new hampshire . what we are doing to our sons and daughters , it is immoral . we are sending them into fight with their arms tied behind their back . they cannot defend themselves . and it is wrong . and i will tell you this . look . america has always been reluctant to use military force . it's the last step we take . but if and when we use it when it comes to defeating isis , we should use it . we should use overwhelming force , kill the enemy and then get the heck out . don't engage in nation building but instead , allow our soldiers to do their jobs instead of risking their lives with politicians making it impossible to accomplish the objective . 
trump i promise i would have gotten it . 
cruz maria , critically , when it comes to climate change . . . 
trump i'm just telling you , i'm doing very well with hispanics . and by the way , i settled my suit , as you know , with univision . it was settled . we're good friends now . it was all settled up . laughter very happy , very happy . very good people . i'm just telling you i'm just telling you that i will do really well with hispanics . i will do better than anybody on this stage . i have respect for the people on the stage , but i will do very well with hispanics . but i'm telling you also , i'm bringing people , democrats over and i'm bringing independents over , and we're building a much bigger , much stronger republican party . 
trump you shouldn't have used it then , jeb . 
christie i put it in the list , dana . we should be doing these things and forcing the president to take action . 
trump well , i have to tell you , i hear phenomenal things . i hear your wife is a lovely woman . . . 
trump now on let me explain that . you're right . let me explain . first time the question had been put to me , it was very early on . the migration had just started . and i had heard that the number was a very , very small number . by the second day , two or three days later , i heard the number was going to be thousands and thousands of people . you know , when they originally heard about it , they were talking about bringing very , very small numbers in . and i said , begrudgingly , well , i guess maybe that's ok . it was not like , let's bring them in , because i think we should build a safe zone in we should really what we should be doing is building safe zones so they can stay in their own country and not go all over , and at least this way we're not going to have the problem . that's what we have to do . but just just to set because i fully understand what you're asking . when i first heard the question , first time the question was ever asked to me , first time i really had known about the question , the migration had just started . i was very much like , ok , by the time i went back and studied it , and they were talking about bringing thousands and thousands , i changed my tune . and i don't think there's anything wrong with that . 
cruz let me say on that . . . 
trump well , first of all , i want you to understand that the democrats , and i've watched them very intensely , even though it's a very , very boring thing to watch , that the democrats are doing nothing with social security . they're leaving it the way it is . in fact , they want to increase it . they want to actually give more . and that's what we're up against . and whether we like it or not , that is what we're up against . i will do everything within my power not to touch social security , to leave it the way it is ; to make this country rich again ; to bring back our jobs ; to get rid of deficits ; to get rid of waste , fraud and abuse , which is rampant in this country , rampant , totally rampant . and it's my absolute intention to leave social security the way it is . not increase the age and to leave it as is . you have 22 years , you have a long time to go . it's not long in terms of what we're talking about , but it's still a long time to go , and i want to leave social security as is , i want to make our country rich again so we can afford it . i want to bring back our jobs , i want to do things that will make us , that will bring back gdp . . . i mean , as an example , gdp was zero essentially for the last two quarters . if that ever happened in china . you would have had a depression like nobody's ever seen before . they go down to 7 percent , 8 percent , and it's a it's a national tragedy . we're at zero , we're not doing anything . we've lost our jobs . we've lost everything . we're losing everything . our jobs are gone , our businesses are being taken out of the country . i want to make america great again and i want to leave social security as is . we're going to get rid of waste , fraud , abuse and bring back business . 
bush a little of your own medicine there , donald . 
cruz . . . i was honored to be endorsed by gun owners of america . . . 
trump yes . well , the currency manipulation they don't discuss in the agreement , which is a disaster . if you look at the way china and india and almost everybody takes advantage of the united states china in particular , because they're so good . it's the number one abuser of this country . and if you look at the way they take advantage , it's through currency manipulation . it's not even discussed in the almost 6 , 000 page agreement . it's not even discussed . 
trump i have good . . . 
trump i'll tell you why ; it's very simple . 
rubio . . . what's your plan . . . 
cruz he's hunting them down and stomping them . 
trump no , i said , i would use they were asking me what to do about north korea . china , they don't like to tell us but they have total control just about , of north korea . they can solve the problem of north korea if they wanted to but they taunt us . they say , well , we don't really have control . without china , north korea doesn't even eat . china is ripping us on trade . they're devaluing their currency and they're killing our companies . thousands of thousands you look at the number of companies and the number in terms of manufacturing of plans that we've lost 50 , 000 because of china . crosstalk 
cruz well maria , i would note you made the exact same point here that i made at the last debate , and you're right that senator rubio called me a liar for saying that . you know , we've both seen at home when washington politicians say about an illegal , or unconstitutional program . well , it'll have to end some day , not immediately , but someday in the future . that , inevitably , is when a politician doesn't plan to end it at all . you know , i'm reminded of that that is the same position that marco took in iowa on ethanol subsidies . when i campaigned in iowa , i took on the lobbyists , took on the corporate welfare and said we should have no ethanol subsidies . marco's position was the same as it is to illegal amnesty . well , someday it should end , just not now . and , frankly , i think we need a president who knows what he believes in , is willing to say it on day one , not at the end of his term when it's somebody else's problem . 
fiorina . . . yes , the middle ground is this . . . 
trump i never said that . i never said that . 
cruz you know , marco made reference earlier to the litigation against trump university . it's a fraud case . his lawyers have scheduled the trial for july . i want you to think about , if this man is the nominee , having the republican nominee . . . bell ringing . . . on the stand in court , being cross examined about whether he committed fraud . you don't think the mainstream media will go crazy on that ? and on substance , how do we nominate a candidate who has said hillary clinton was the best secretary of state of modern times , who agreed with her on foreign policy , who agrees with bernie sanders on health care , who agreed with barack obama on the wall street bailout ? 
bush yes . 
cruz with an eye to february 20th , carolina . 
bush yeah . 
trump thank you . thanks . 
bush inaudible , the great majority of republicans and americans believe in a hopeful future . they don't believe in building walls and a pessimistic view of the future . they're concerned that washington is so dysfunctional it is holding them back . there are lids on people's aspirations . think about it six and a half million people working part time . workforce participation rates lower than they were in 1977 . six million more people living in poverty than the day that barack obama got elected president , and the left just wants more of the same . we have to offer a compelling alternative that is based on hope and optimism and grounded in serious policy , which i've laid out . and you can go get it at jeb2016 . com . 
huckabee jake ? jake ? 
cruz . . . is the lowest personal rate any candidate up here has , and what it would also enable us to do is for every citizen to fill out their taxes on a postcard so we can eliminate the irs . cheering and pplause 
bush . . . this relates to strategic patience . 
cruz well , megyn , you know , at the end of the day for the folks at home , this is not about the insults back and forth between the candidates . this is not about what attacks we can throw at each other . this is the people at home who are struggling through seven years of barack obama . this is the single moms who are working two and three jobs , 28 , 29 hours a week because their hours have been forcibly reduced because of obamacare . this is the truck drivers and the steel workers and the mechanics with calluses on their hands who have seen their wages not grow year after year after year while the cost of living goes up . this is all the young people coming out of school with student loans up to their eyeballs that aren't able to find a job . and i don't think the people of america are interested in a bunch of bickering school children . they are interested in solutions , not slogans . it's easy to say , make things better , make things great . you can even print it and put it on a baseball cap . but the question is , do you understand the principles that made america great in the first place ? as president , i will repeal every word of obamacare . i will pull back the regulators that are killing small businesses . and we will pass a simple flat tax and abolish the irs . and what that's going to do , megyn , is small businesses are going to explode . we are going to see millions of high paying jobs . we are going to see wages going up . we are going to see opportunity . that's where our focus needs to be . that's where my focus is . and that is why our campaign is the only campaign that over and over again has beaten donald trump to date , and it's why we are the one campaign that going forward can and will beat donald trump in this election . 
rubio you paid a million dollars . 
paul well , thank you very much . i would like to thank ted for co sponsoring my bill , audit the fed . and i think it's precisely because of the arrogance of someone like ben bernanke , who now calls us all know nothings , that is precisely why we need audit the fed . i think it is really very much a huge problem that an organization as powerful as the fed comes in , lobbies against them being audited on the hill . i would prevent them lobbying congress . i don't think the fed should be involved with lobbying us . i think we should examine how the fed has really been part of the problem . you want to study income inequality , let's bring the fed forward and talk about fed policy and how it causes income inequality . let's also bring the fed forward and have them explain how they caused the housing boom and the crisis , and what they've done to make us better or worse . i think the fed has been a great problem in our society . what you need to do is free up interest rates . interest rates are the price of money , and we shouldn't have price controls on the price of money . 
trump i think they're wrong 100 percent . what we need look , the insurance companies take care of the politicians . the insurance companies get what they want . we should have gotten rid of the lines around each state so we can have real competition . we thought that was gone , we thought those lines were going to be gone , so something happened at the last moment where obamacare got approved , and all of that was thrown out the window . the reason is some of the people in the audience are insurance people , and insurance lobbyists , and special interests . they got i'm not going to point to these gentlemen , of course , they're part of the problem , other than ben , in all fairness . and , actually , the governor too , let's just talk about these too , ok ? laughter because i don't think the governor had too much to do with this . but , we should have gotten rid of the borders , we should have gotten rid of the lines around the state so there's great competition . the insurance companies are making a fortune on every single thing they do . i'm self funding my campaign . i'm the only one in either party self funding my campaign . i'm going to do what's right . we have to get rid of the lines around the states so that there's serious , serious competition . 
christie i want to talk to the folks at home . i want to ask you are you fed up with how washington taxes you ? are you fed up with how washington wastes your money ? are you concerned like i am that the debt and deficits of washington , d . c . are endangering america's future ? i've got one more question for you then . are you serious about this election ? because if you are , you need to elect someone who's deadly serious about changing this culture . i am deadly serious about changing this culture . i changed it in new jersey . i'm deadly serious about doing this job the right way . i'm prepared . i'm tested . i'm ready . and i want to make this our government . for the people who say we can't do it , i say hell no , we can do it together . 
trump but i do hear she's a lovely woman . 
rubio well , that's a great question , and let me begin by answering it . laughter this election is about the future , about what kind of country this nation is gonna be in the 21st century . this next ph election is actually a generational choice . a choice about what kind of nation we will be in the 21st century . for over 2 . 5 centuries , america's been a special country , the one place on earth where anyone from anywhere can achieve anything , a nation that's been a force for good on this planet . but now , a growing number of americans feel out of place in their own country . we have a society that stigmatizes those that hold cultural values that are traditional . we have a society where people millions of people are living paycheck to paycheck . they're working as hard as they ever have , but they're living paycheck to paycheck because the economy has changed underneath their feet . we have young americans who owe thousands of dollars in student loans for a degree that doesn't lead to a job . for the first time in 35 years , we have more businesses dying than starting , and around the world , every day brings news of a new humiliation for america many the direct response direct consequence of decisions made when hillary clinton was the secretary of the of state . and so here's the truth this election is about the future , and the democratic party , and the political left has no ideas about the future . all their ideas are the same , tired ideas of the past . more government , more spending . for every issue for america , their answer is a new tax on someone , and a new government program . this nation is going to turn the page , and that's what this election should be about , and , as i said at the first debate . . . bell ringing . . . if i am our nominee , they will be the party of the past , we will be the party of the 21st century . cheering 
trump the fact is , there is a big overhang . there's a big question mark on your head . and you can't do that to the party . you really can't . you can't do that to the party . you have to have certainty . even if it was a one percent chance , and it's far greater than one percent because inaudible . i mean , you have great constitutional lawyers that say you can't run . if there was a and you know i'm not bringing a suit . i promise . but the democrats are going to bring a lawsuit , and you have to have certainty . you can't have a question . i can agree with you or not , but you can't have a question over your head . 
kasich . . . the need to arm the ukrainians . they have been ignored , and we need to help them as well . . . 
rubio you lied about the polish workers . 
huckabee . . . is in trouble , but it's not beyond repair . but it's going to take leadership who sees the greatness of this country , and who believes that once again we can be one nation , under god . i'll be my best to do that , and thank you for your support . 
trump jeb wants to be he wants to be a tough guy tonight . i didn't take the property . 
bush you've got to keep asking . you've got to keep asking because this is a hugely important issue . if you can encrypt messages , isis can , over these platforms , and we have no ability to have a cooperative relationship 
carson the fair tax . looking at both of them , and evaluating them both , and i'm talking to the american people because one of the things we must recognize is that this country is of , for , and by the people . and , it's really time that the government get out of the way , and let the people be the ones who decide how they want to run their country . 
trump i'm the only one who is going to save social security , believe me . 
bush . . . this is a guy who thinks that hillary clinton is a great negotiator in iran . . . 
kasich i think that the chinese government butchered those kids . and when that guy stood in front that young man stood in front of that tank , we ought to build a statue of him over here when he faced down the chinese government . now i will tell you , i don't believe that we need to make china an enemy . they are a competitor . but i want to go back to three things they should do . we should have the heat on them to work in north korea to get rid of that guy and the things that he's doing , number one . number two , they need to realize they don't own the south china sea . and i will compliment the administration for sending a carrier battle group into the south china sea . and thirdly , when it comes to the issue of cyber attacks , we're going to have to beef up the cyber command . and they need to understand that if you attack us we will defend ourselves , everything , including our grid . but if you do it , we have the capability to take out your systems . the president has not given the cyber command that authority . i will . and when it comes to trade , i will tell you this , they can't manipulate their currency . that will not be anything that i would allow them to get away with . and if i saw them doing it , i would take immediate action and make sure that the american worker is protected . 
christie no , absolutely not . the president wants to do things without working with his congress , without working with the legislature , and without getting the consent of the american people . and the fact is that that's not a democracy . that's a dictatorship . and we need to very , very concerned about that . see , here's the thing . i don't think the founders put the second amendment as number two by accident . i don't think they dropped all the amendments into a hat and picked them out of a hat . i think they made the second amendment the second amendment because they thought it was just that important . the fact is in new jersey , what we have done is to make it easier now to get a conceal and carry permit . we have made it easier to do that , not harder . and the way we've done it properly through regulatory action , not by signing unconstitutional executive orders . this guy is a petulant child . that's what he is . i mean , you know . . . . . . the fact is , neil , let's think about let's think about and i want to maybe i hope the president is watching tonight , because here's what i'd like to tell him . mr . president , we're not against you . we're against your policies . when you became president , you had a democratic congress and a filibuster proof democratic senate . you had only 21 republican governors in this country . and now after seven years of your policies , we have the biggest majority we've had since the 1920s in the house ; a republican majority in the senate ; and 31 out of 50 republican governors . the american people have rejected your agenda and now you're trying to go around it . that's not right . it's not constitutional . and we are going to kick your rear end out of the white house come this fall . 
trump we better solve the problem before it's too late . 
paul i mean , this is what's wrong . he buys and sells politicians of all stripes , he's already . . . 
trump . . . and , by the way , just so you understand . . . . . . this is a case i could have settled very easily , but i don't settle cases very easily when i'm right . ninety eight percent approval rating , we have an a from the better business bureau . . . 
cruz yes . now , let's be clear , there is a role for the federal reserve what the fed is doing now is it is a series of philosopher kings trying to guess what's happening with the economy . you look at the fed , one of the reasons we had the financial crash is throughout the 2000s , we had loose money , we had an asset bubble , it drove up the price of real estate , drove up the price of commodities , and then in the third quarter of 2008 , the fed tightened the money and crashed those asset prices , which caused a cascading collapse . that's why i am supporting getting back to rules based monetary system not with a bunch of philosopher kings deciding , but tied . . . crosstalk 
trump i'd like to respond . 
kasich can i just can i jake , can i just make one point on this whole military discussion ? 
paul we're the richest , freest , most humanitarian nation in the history of mankind . but we also borrow a million dollars a minute . and the question i have for all americans is , think about it , can you be a fiscal conservative if you don't conserve all of the money ? if you're a profligate spender , you spend money in an unlimited fashion for the military , is that a conservative notion ? we have to be conservative with all spending , domestic spending and welfare spending . i'm the only fiscal conservative on the stage . 
walker just one second on this , though . we we spent a lot of time talking about hillary clinton and and pitting us back and forth . let's be clear , we should be talking about hillary clinton on that last subject , because everywhere in the world that hillary clinton touched is more messed up today than before she and the president inaudible . 
bush you find me . . . 
christie what i say to carla is that the first job of the president of the united states is to protect your safety and your security and the security and safety of your family . and this debate stops with me in the discussions with the fbi director . now , listen , i'm a former federal prosecutor , i know jim comey . we've worked together . he was the u . s . attorney in manhattan when i was a u . s . attorney in new jersey . and when jim comey gets up before congress and says , we cannot effectively vet these people , for me as president , that's the end of the conversation . we have to put america's security first . the american people we on this stage need to open our ears . we need to open our ears . the american people are not whispering to us . they are screaming to us . and they're screaming to us that it's our job to actually make this government work . it's so dysfunctional under barack obama and hillary clinton . it's so ineffective . it's so ineffectual that the american people say , we don't trust them to do anything anymore . so i'm not going to let syrian refugees , any syrian refugees in this country . and it was widows and orphans , by the way , and we now know from watching the san bernardino attack that women can commit heinous , heinous acts against humanity just the same as men can do it . and so i don't back away from that position for a minute . when the fbi director tells me that he can vet those people , then we'll consider it and not a moment before because your safety and security is what's most important to me . 
trump and as you understand , i mean , you understand very well from the wall street journal , currency manipulation is the single great weapon people have . they don't even discuss it in this agreement . so i say , it's a very bad deal , should not be approved . if it is approved , it will just be more bad trade deals , more loss of jobs for our country . we are losing jobs like nobody's ever lost jobs before . i want to bring jobs back into this country . 
trump as a policy , i would almost leave it up to the people . don't forget they pay in and they pay in , and maybe they do well , and maybe some people want it . but the fact is that there are people that truly don't need it , and there are many people that do need it very , very badly . and i would be willing to write mine off 100 percent , dana . 
trump yes . 
trump . . . first of all , that's called a . . . 
paul ronald reagan was strong , but ronald reagan didn't . . . 
rubio . . . because when you bring them in this way , when you bring someone in on one of these visas they can't go work for anybody else . they either work for you or they have to go back home . you basically have them captive , so you don't have to worry about competing for higher wages with another hotel down the street . and , that's why you bring workers from abroad . you argue that you're here to fight on behalf of the american worker , but when you have chances to help the american worker . . . bell ringing . . . but when you have chances to help the american workers , you're making your clothes overseas and you're hiring your workers from overseas . 
cruz you know how i know that ? 
trump actually , it was for business . it was . it was . it was for business . i pride myself , including outside of the united states . i'm doing almost 120 deals outside of the which i hope to be able to stop very soon and let my children handle it but we're doing many , many deals outside of the united states . i support politicians . in 2008 , i supported hillary clinton . i supported many other people , by the way . and that was because of the fact that i'm in business . i did support very heavily ronald reagan . i also supported george bush , by the way . 
christie i think the adams family has been shorted in the currency business . our country wouldn't be here without john adams , and he would not have been able to do it without abigal adams , so , i'd put abigail adams on the bill . 
trump i beat hillary clinton in many polls . . . 
rubio so let me begin with this . i actually believe first of all , this is their money . they do pay . it is refundable , not just against the taxes they pay to the government , but also the on their federal income tax , it's refundable against the payroll tax . everyone pays payroll tax . this is their money . this is not our money . and here's what i don't understand if you invest that money in a piece of equipment , if you invest that money in a business , you get to write it off your taxes . but if you invest it in your children , in the future of america and strengthening your family , we're not going to recognize that in our tax code ? the family is the most important institution in society . and , yes . . . 
fiorina we just spent we just spent the last 10 minutes . . . 
trump border patrol , i was at the border last week . border patrol , people that i deal with , that i talk to , they say this is what's happening . because our leaders are stupid . our politicians are stupid . and the mexican government is much smarter , much sharper , much more cunning . and they send the bad ones over because they don't want to pay for them . they don't want to take care of them . why should they when the stupid leaders of the united states will do it for them ? and that's what is happening whether you like it or not . cheering and applause 
carson with 100 percent certainly , i will predict the winner it will either be denver or carolina . 
rubio i need to add a couple of points to this . the first is , i've never met vladimir putin , but i know enough about him to know he is a gangster . he is basically an organized crime figure that runs a country , controls a 2 trillion economy . and is using to build up his military in a rapid way despite the fact his economy is a disaster . he understands only geopolitical strength . and every time he has acted anywhere in the world , whether it's in ukraine or georgia before that , or now in the middle east , it's because he is trusting in weakness . his calculation in the middle east is that he has seen what this president has done , which is nothing , the president has no strategy , our allies in the region do not trust us . for goodness sake , there is only one pro american free enterprise democracy in the middle east , it is the state of israel . and we have a president that treats the prime minister of israel with less respect than what he gives the ayatollah in iran . and so our allies in the region don't trust us . cheering and applause vladimir putin is exploiting that weakness , for purposes of edging the americans out as the most important geopolitical power broker in the region . and we do have a vested interest . and here's why . because all those radical terrorist groups that , by the way , are not just in syria and in iraq , isis is now in libya . they are a significant presence in libya , and in afghanistan , and a growing presence in pakistan . soon they will be in turkey . they will try jordan . they will try saudi arabia . they are coming to us . they recruit americans using social media . and they don't hate us simply because we support israel . they hate us because of our values . they hate us because our girls go to school . they hate us because women drive in the united states . either they win or we win , and we had better take this risk seriously , it is not going away on its own . cheering and applause 
rubio . . . donald has not demonstrated that . 
carson well , i definitely believe that he is unstable , and i do , in fact , believe that china has a lot more influence with him than we do . but we also recognize that north korea is in severe financial straits , and they have decided to use their resources to build their military , rather than to feed their people and to take care of the various humanitarian responsibilities that they have . we can capitalize upon that . you know , we should use our economic power in lots of different ways . i think we can use that in order to keep putin contained , because he is a one horse show . energy . and we have an abundance of energy , but we have archaic energy exportation rules . we need to get rid of those , allow ourselves to really make europe dependent on us and other parts of the world dependent on us for energy . put him back in his little box where he belongs . and , you know , we need to be doing lots of other things with the resources that we have . so economic power works just as well as military power , perhaps even better . and speaking of that , our military needs to be upgraded . you know , you look at things like our ohio class submarines , they're 25 years old . our minuteman 3 missiles they are 34 years old . our b 52 bombers 50 years old . you know , if we don't get the military right nothing else matters . 
trump but let's see what happens at the end of three years . let's see who's right . 
trump and by the way , i've hired and by the way , i've hired tens of thousands of people over at my job . you've hired nobody . 
trump this little guy has lied so much . . . 
christie no , john . john , do you want me to answer or do you want to answer ? laughter how are we going to do this ? because , i've got to tell you the truth , even in new jersey what you're doing is called rude . so . . . laughter we've laid out a national energy plan that says that we should invest in all types of energy . i will tell you , you could win a bet at a bar tonight , since we're talking about fantasy football , if you ask who the top three states in america are that produce solar energy california and arizona are easy , but number three is new jersey . why ? because we work with the private sector to make solar energy affordable and available to businesses and individuals in our state . we need to make sure that we do everything across all kinds of energy natural gas , oil , absolutely . but also where it's affordable , solar , wind in iowa has become very affordable and it makes sense . that is the way we deal with global warming , climate change , or any of those problems , not through government intervention , not through government taxes , and for god's sake , don't send washington another dime until they stop wasting the money they're already sending there . 
trump i think i'd get along very well with vladimir putin . i just think so . end video clip laughter 
trump i can't be neil . and the and the reason i can't be is that we are a country that is being beaten on every front economically , militarily . there is nothing that we do now to win . we don't win anymore . our taxes are too high . i've come up with a tax plan that many , many people like very much . it's going to be a tremendous plan . i think it'll make our country and our economy very dynamic . but , taxes too high , wages too high , we're not going to be able to compete against the world . i hate to say it , but we have to leave it the way it is . people have to go out , they have to work really hard and have to get into that upper stratum . but we can not do this if we are going to compete with the rest of the world . we just can't do it . 
rubio yeah , again , as i said , we're raising a family in the 21st century and it's one of the reasons why my tax plan is a pro family tax plan . it increases the per child tax credit , because i didn't read about this in a book . i know for a fact how difficult it is to raise children , how expensive it's become for working families . and i make a lot more than the average american . imagine how hard it is for these people out there that are making 40 , 50 , 60 , 000 a year , and they're trying to provide for their families at a time when this economy is not growing . we can't afford another four years of that . which is what we're gonna get if we elect a big government liberal like hillary clinton to the white house . thank you , senator . 
